Preface

序言





Few words strike greater fear in the hearts of economists and politicians than Japanization. That specter of chronic malaise, deflation, crushing debt, and political paralysis drove central bankers from Ben Bernanke in the United States to Mario Draghi in Europe to flood markets with liquidity as never before in an all-out effort to avert their own lost decades.

在经济学家和政治家的心中，没有什么词比 "日本化 "更令人恐惧了。长期萎靡不振、通货紧缩、债务沉重和政治瘫痪的幽灵驱使从美国的本-伯南克到欧洲的马里奥-德拉吉等央行行长向市场注入前所未有的流动性，全力避免他们自己失去的几十年。



Decades ago, the fear was of Japanese dominance. Ezra Vogel’s 1979 bestseller, Japan as Number One, was emblematic of passions across the Pacific. The Harvard University social sciences professor sketched out a scenario of a tiny island nation with no natural resources dominating the economic world that seemed as plausible as frightening to the American and Europe business elites.

几十年前，人们担心的是日本的统治。埃兹拉-沃格尔（Ezra Vogel）1979 年出版的畅销书《头号大国日本》（Japan as Number One）代表了整个太平洋地区的激情。这位哈佛大学社会科学教授勾勒了一个没有自然资源的小岛国主宰经济世界的场景，这对美国和欧洲的商界精英来说既可信又可怕。



Subsequent years would see entire generations of editors rushing Japanese-are-coming scare pieces into print. Time magazine’s March 30, 1981, Japan cover, “The World’s Toughest Competitor,” was illustrative of the hysteria, as was the timing. Amid oil shocks, stagflation, fiscal crises, and the Iran hostage crisis, Japan’s meteoric rise was an existential blow to an America whose main business was doing business better than anyone.

随后几年，整整几代编辑都在匆忙将日本即将到来的恐慌文章付梓。时代周刊》1981 年 3 月 30 日的日本封面 "世界上最难对付的竞争对手 "就充分说明了这种歇斯底里的情绪和时机。在石油冲击、滞胀、财政危机和伊朗人质危机的背景下，日本的飞速崛起对美国来说是一次致命的打击，因为美国的主要业务是比任何人都更好地做生意。



Over the next decade, Japan was just as exciting and feared in world economic terms as China is today. Its companies and banks dominated top-10 lists, while once-proud U.S. automakers were eating Japan’s exhaust. If you wanted to see some of your favorite Van Gogh, Picasso, or Warhol paintings, you had to visit Tokyo or Osaka. As jewels like Rockefeller Center, Universal Studios, Pebble Beach golf course, and myriad skyscrapers fell into Japanese hands, commentators screamed about the commercial equivalent of Pearl Harbor. Japan-bashing was sweeping Capitol Hill, too. In 1990, Congresswoman Helen Bentley said the United States “is rapidly becoming a colony of Japan.”

在接下来的十年中，日本在世界经济中的地位就像今天的中国一样令人兴奋和恐惧。日本的公司和银行占据了排行榜的前十名，而曾经引以为傲的美国汽车制造商却在蚕食日本的市场份额。如果你想看到自己喜欢的梵高、毕加索或沃霍尔的画作，就必须去东京或大阪。当洛克菲勒中心、环球影城、圆石滩高尔夫球场和无数摩天大楼等瑰宝落入日本人之手时，评论员们惊呼这相当于珍珠港的商业轰炸。对日本的抨击也席卷了国会山。1990 年，国会议员海伦-本特利（Helen Bentley）说，美国 "正在迅速沦为日本的殖民地"。



By 1992, when Michael Crichton’s jingoistic novel, Rising Sun, about economic imperialism, hit bookshelves, it was already over. By the time the film version of Rising Sun, starring Sean Connery and Wesley Snipes, began in theaters in 1993, the Nikkei was plunging and Japan’s fabled banks were in need of government bailouts. The Nikkei 225 stock average—which peaked at 38,957—was in freefall and taking Japan’s once-limitless confidence down with it.

1992 年，当迈克尔-克莱顿关于经济帝国主义的金戈铁马小说《旭日东升》摆上书架时，一切都已结束。1993 年，由肖恩-康纳利（Sean Connery）和韦斯利-斯奈普斯（Wesley Snipes）主演的电影版《旭日东升》上映时，日经指数暴跌，日本传说中的银行需要政府救助。日经 225 指数--最高达到 38,957 点--一泻千里，日本人曾经无限的信心也随之跌落。



Since then, Japan has ricocheted from one hapless government to the next (it’s had 16 prime ministers since 1990 to America’s four presidents), rolled out trillions of dollars of stimulus packages, cut interest rates to zero and below, and done battle with currency markets to weaken the yen countless times, and still deflation has deepened and growth has remained negligible. This noxious mix of trifling growth, high debt, falling consumer prices, waning confidence, and political dysfunction has come to be known as Japanization.

从那时起，日本的政府换了又换（自 1990 年以来，日本换了 16 位首相，而美国换了 4 位总统），推出了数万亿美元的经济刺激计划，将利率降至零或更低，无数次与货币市场交战以削弱日元汇率，但通货紧缩仍在加剧，经济增长仍然微不足道。这种增长乏力、债务高企、消费价格下降、信心减弱、政治功能失调的恶性循环被称为 "日本化"。



It should worry China, then, that experts on this dreaded scenario are turning their attention to Beijing. Take Brian Reading, whose quest to understand what the world can learn from Tokyo’s mess dates back to his 1992 book, Japan: The Coming Collapse. In July 2013, he wrote a 40-page report with Lombard Street Research Ltd. colleague Diana Choyleva, titled “China’s Chance to Avoid Japan’s Mistakes.”

因此，中国应该感到担忧的是，研究这一可怕局面的专家们正将目光转向北京。以布莱恩-雷丁（Brian Reading）为例，他从 1992 年出版的《日本：即将崩溃》（Japan：即将崩溃》一书。2013年7月，他与伦巴德街研究有限公司的同事戴安娜-乔伊列娃撰写了一份长达40页的报告，题为《中国避免日本错误的机会》。



Over in Hong Hong, investor inquiries on the similarities between China and Japan also drove JPMorgan Chase & Co. economist Grace Ng to revisit the topic. Her warnings that China today and Japan in the 1980s share an uncannily similar build-up in broad measures of credit to almost double the economy’s size brought furrows to many a brow in Beijing.

在香港，投资者对中国和日本相似性的询问也促使摩根大通银行经济学家吴恩达重新审视这一话题。她警告说，今天的中国和 20 世纪 80 年代的日本有着惊人相似的广义信贷积累，经济规模几乎翻了一番。



So, just how susceptible is China to Japanization? How vulnerable, for that matter, are the much larger economies of the United States and the European Union? The answer, at least to varying degrees, is quite a bit. The same could be said for India, Indonesia, Thailand, and other developing economies if national leaders aren’t careful.

那么，中国究竟有多容易受到日本化的影响？美国和欧盟这些规模更大的经济体又有多容易受到影响？答案是，至少在不同程度上是相当脆弱的。如果国家领导人不小心的话，印度、印度尼西亚、泰国和其他发展中经济体也会受到同样的影响。



In February 2009, none other than U.S. President Barack Obama cited Japan’s “lost decade” as something his presidency would seek to avoid. In July 2010, James Bullard, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, warned that America could be “enmeshed in a Japanese-style deflationary outcome within the next several years.”

2009 年 2 月，美国总统奥巴马将日本 "失去的十年 "作为其总统任期内要努力避免的事情。2010 年 7 月，圣路易斯联邦储备银行行长詹姆斯-布拉德警告说，美国可能 "在未来几年内陷入日本式的通货紧缩"。



When economist Lawrence Summers warned of a “secular stagnation,” an economic rout that has more or less become permanent, on November 8, 2013, he was indeed hinting at such an outcome. As the world emerges from the wreckage of Wall Street’s 2008 crash and Europe’s own crisis deepens, few lessons are more timely or critical than those offered by Japan, a once-vibrant model for developing economies that joined the world’s richest nations, lost its way, and has been struggling to relocate it ever since. Its deflation, tepid growth, waning consumer spending, and monumental debt buildup were met with timidity at the government’s highest levels, compounding Japan’s pain. Conventional tools like fiscal spending and lower borrowing costs did little to revitalize growth and have lost potency.

2013年11月8日，当经济学家劳伦斯-萨默斯（Lawrence Summers）发出 "世俗停滞"（secular stagnation）的警告时，他确实暗示了这种结果。随着世界走出华尔街2008年崩盘的残局，欧洲自身的危机也在加深，没有什么教训比日本提供的教训更及时、更关键了。日本曾经是发展中经济体的典范，但在加入世界最富裕国家行列后却迷失了方向，此后一直在努力重新定位。日本的通货紧缩、增长乏力、消费支出减少、债务累累，而政府最高层却畏首畏尾，这加剧了日本的痛苦。财政支出和降低借贷成本等传统手段在重振经济增长方面收效甚微，并已失去效力。



Why? Tokyo’s biggest sin, aside from being slow to act, was hiding myriad structural problems with macroeconomic largess. Beginning in the early 1990s, Japan avoided a wholesale cleansing of the excesses from the 1980s by engaging in endless rounds of Keynesian-style fiscal inducements and ultraloose central bank policy. Instead of breaking ties between the government, banks, and companies, deregulating industries, and letting any of the forces of creative destruction championed by economist Joseph Schumpeter play out, officials maintained the status quo. Rather than encourage entire industries to modernize or rekindle the entrepreneurial spirit needed to raise the nation’s game, the government doubled down on the export-led models of the past. In place of innovative changes to the tax, education, and social-welfare systems, the government poured untold trillions of dollars into public works projects to avoid changes to the micro-economy, leaving Japan with the world’s biggest public debt and a credit rating on par with Bermuda, the Czech Republic, Estonia—and China.

为什么？除了行动迟缓之外，东京最大的罪过是用宏观经济的慷慨掩盖了无数的结构性问题。从 20 世纪 90 年代初开始，日本通过无休止地实施凯恩斯主义式的财政刺激政策和超宽松的中央银行政策，避免了对 20 世纪 80 年代的过激行为进行全面清理。官员们没有打破政府、银行和公司之间的联系，放松对行业的管制，让经济学家约瑟夫-熊彼特（Joseph Schumpeter）所倡导的创造性破坏力量得以发挥，而是维持现状。政府没有鼓励整个行业实现现代化，也没有重新点燃提高国家竞争力所需的企业家精神，而是加倍奉行过去的出口导向型模式。政府没有对税收、教育和社会福利制度进行创新性改革，而是将数万亿美元投入公共工程项目，以避免微观经济的变化，从而使日本背上了世界上最大的公共债务，其信用评级与百慕大、捷克共和国、爱沙尼亚和中国不相上下。



In this book I explore what the world can learn from a Japanese economic funk that began more than 20 years ago and has never really ended. That means exploring where Japan went wrong, how it sank under the weight of hubris and political atrophy, and missed opportunity after opportunity to scrap an insular model based on overinvestment, export-led growth, and excessive debt.

在这本书中，我探讨了世界可以从日本20多年前开始的、从未真正结束的经济困境中学到什么。这意味着要探究日本错在哪里，如何在自大和政治萎缩的重压下沉沦，以及如何错失了一次又一次的机会，放弃了基于过度投资、出口导向型增长和过度债务的封闭模式。



This argument will seem decidedly at odds with what we read in the international media in 2013. The story has been one of Japanese revival, of reformist Prime Minister Shinzo Abe taking on the political and corporate establishments, of a newly confident nation reclaiming the mantle of innovative powerhouse and diplomatic authority, of an economic power that is, to use Abe’s own description, “back.” I will counter this conventional wisdom and detail how Abenomics is largely the same old mix of fiscal and monetary excess that left Japan with a public debt it may never be able to pay off, zero interest rates indefinitely, and little to show for it—jazzed up as something new and different. Abenomics is a brilliant marketing campaign in search of a product.

这一论点似乎与我们在 2013 年从国际媒体上读到的内容大相径庭。我们看到的是日本复兴的故事，是改革派首相安倍晋三向政治和企业界发起挑战的故事，是一个自信满满的国家重新夺回创新强国和外交权威的故事，是一个用安倍晋三自己的话说 "回来了 "的经济强国的故事。我将反驳这种传统观念，并详细说明安倍经济学在很大程度上就是财政和货币超发的老一套，它给日本留下了可能永远无法偿还的公共债务、无限期的零利率，以及几乎没有什么可炫耀的东西，但却被包装成了新的与众不同的东西。安倍经济学是一场寻找产品的精彩营销活动。



This book will explore the forces stunting Japan’s evolution into a more vibrant, creative, and competitive economic species and what the world can learn from each of them. They include: how Japan papers over economic cracks with monetary and fiscal policy; when the bond market becomes a monster; how institutionalized sexism kills growth; how the rampant cronyism the created the Fukushima nuclear crisis holds Japan back; how isolation, known as the Galapagos effect, stunts Japan’s evolution; how amateurish diplomacy undermines Japan’s global soft power; and whether Abenomics can save the world, as no less an authority than Nobel laureate Paul Krugman argues.

本书将探讨阻碍日本发展成为更具活力、创造力和竞争力的经济物种的各种力量，以及世界可以从每一种力量中学到什么。这些因素包括：日本如何用货币和财政政策掩盖经济裂缝；债券市场何时成为怪物；制度化的性别歧视如何扼杀经济增长；猖獗的裙带关系如何导致福岛核危机，阻碍日本发展；被称为 "加拉帕戈斯效应 "的孤立如何阻碍日本发展；业余外交如何削弱日本的全球软实力；以及诺贝尔经济学奖得主保罗-克鲁格曼（Paul Krugman）等权威人士认为，安倍经济学能否拯救世界。





Acknowledgments

致谢





Thanks to my parents for their unwavering love and teaching me to be always and everywhere curious. To my sisters and brothers for being my loyal companions in this adventure called life. To Ochiais near and far for their encouragement and support. And to the following people for their advice, inspiration, and assistance: Shamim Adam, Jake Adelstein, Marco Babic, Terrence Barrett, Kler Batino, Stuart Biggs, Kevin Carroll, Chrisanne Chin, Kyung Bok Cho, John Connor, Michael Forsythe, Brian Fowler, Phil Gibb, James Greiff, Nisid Hajari, Patrick Harrington, Nick Hayward, Peter Himmelman, Barry Horowitz, Momoe Ikeda, Netty Ismail, Aki Ito, Tony Jordan, Adrian Kennedy, Simon Kennedy, Jeff Kingston, Walter Krumholz, Miho Kurosaki, Peter Langan, Yoolim Lee, Roger Lewis, Adam Majendie, Kanoko Matsuyama, Jim McDonald, Damian Milverton, Joe Mysak, Elio Orsara, Tomoko Sato, David Shipley, Rocky Swift, Chian-Wei Teo, Tomoko Tsuchiya, Peter Vercoe, Matthew Winkler, and, of course, Nick Wallwork and the terrific folks at Wiley for taking on this project. Finally, a shout-out to my old friend, the late Daniel Pearl: It was the last time I saw you, 13 years ago, in that smoky bar in Mumbai, when you encouraged me to write a book about Japan. Well, sir, here you go.

感谢我的父母，感谢他们坚定不移的爱，感谢他们教导我时刻保持好奇心。感谢我的兄弟姐妹，他们是我在这场名为生命的冒险中的忠实伙伴。感谢远近的落矶人给我的鼓励和支持。感谢以下人士的建议、启发和帮助：Shamim Adam, Jake Adelstein, Marco Babic, Terrence Barrett, Kler Batino, Stuart Biggs, Kevin Carroll, Chrisanne Chin, Kyung Bok Cho, John Connor, Michael Forsythe, Brian Fowler, Phil Gibb, James Greiff, Nisid Hajari, Patrick Harrington, Nick Hayward, Peter Himmelman, Barry Horowitz, Momoe Ikeda, Netty Ismail, Aki Ito, Tony Jordan, Adrian Kennedy, Simon Kennedy,Jeff Kingston、Walter Krumholz、Miho Kurosaki、Peter Langan、Yoolim Lee、Roger Lewis、Adam Majendie、Kanoko Matsuyama、Jim McDonald、Damian Milverton、Joe Mysak、Elio Orsara、Tomoko Sato、David Shipley、Rocky Swift、Chian-Wei Teo、Tomoko Tsuchiya、Peter Vercoe、Matthew Winkler，当然，还有 Nick Wallwork 和 Wiley 的杰出员工们，感谢他们承担了这个项目。最后，我要向我的老朋友、已故的丹尼尔-珀尔致敬：13年前，我最后一次见到你，是在孟买那个烟雾缭绕的酒吧里，你鼓励我写一本关于日本的书。先生，给你。





Chapter 1

How Japan Papers Over Economic Cracks with Monetary and Fiscal Policy

第 1 章 日本如何通过货币和财政政策化解经济裂痕





On November 24, 1997, Lawrence Summers was having an unusually busy Monday morning on a trip to Vancouver, and things were about to get steadily worse. The Asian financial crisis was ricocheting around the globe, and at that very moment claiming its biggest victim yet. South Korea, then the world’s eleventh-largest economy, was days away from receiving a $57 billion international bailout. But on that day, the deputy U.S. Treasury secretary had a far bigger problem on his hands, not in Seoul but in Tokyo: the collapse of 100-year-old Yamaichi Securities Co., an event that sent the Dow Jones Industrial Average down 113 points nearly one month to the day after Asia-crisis worries drove the index down 554 points in a single day, the largest drop ever.

1997 年 11 月 24 日，劳伦斯-萨默斯在温哥华度过了一个异常忙碌的周一上午。亚洲金融危机正席卷全球，并在这一时刻成为最大的受害者。韩国，当时世界第十一大经济体，还有几天就要接受 570 亿美元的国际救助。但就在这一天，这位美国财政部副部长却面临着一个更大的问题，不是在首尔，而是在东京：拥有百年历史的山一证券公司倒闭了，这一事件导致道琼斯工业平均指数在近一个月前下跌了113点，而在此之前，亚洲危机的忧虑导致该指数在一天之内下跌了554点，创下了有史以来的最大跌幅。



I was among a handful of journalists traveling with Summers to British Columbia for a two-day Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit of 18 world leaders. It started out innocuously enough for the star economist. On the schedule for the twenty-fourth were a bunch of bilateral meetings with finance peers from around the Pacific Rim and the occasional debriefing rendezvous with his boss, President Bill Clinton. At a dinner with his traveling press the night before, Summers seemed to relish a few days away from the madness of Washington and the mounting number of demands ending up on his desk as he prepared to replace Robert Rubin as Treasury secretary two years later. Summers gazed out onto Vancouver Harbor, breathed easily, and enjoyed the calm before the proverbial storm.

我是与萨默斯一同前往不列颠哥伦比亚省参加为期两天、由 18 位世界领导人参加的亚太经济合作组织峰会的少数记者之一。对于这位明星经济学家来说，会议一开始并不引人注目。在 24 日的日程表上，萨默斯将与环太平洋地区的金融界同行举行一系列双边会议，并偶尔与他的上司比尔-克林顿总统会面汇报情况。在前一天晚上与巡回记者的晚宴上，萨默斯似乎很高兴能有几天时间远离疯狂的华盛顿，远离两年后他准备接替罗伯特-鲁宾担任财政部长时，摆在他桌上的越来越多的要求。萨默斯眺望着温哥华港，轻松地呼吸着，享受着暴风雨前的宁静。



Yamaichi’s breathtaking implosion the next day represented the largest business failure in Japanese postwar history, and it raised the specter of the then-second-biggest economy joining Indonesia, Malaysia, South Korea, and Thailand in turmoil. For Summers, November 24 was a marathon of frantic face-to-face meetings with Japanese officials, including then–Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto, and International Monetary Fund staffers. By day’s end, the most optimistic assessment Summers could offer was that Japan probably wouldn’t require a bailout from the International Monetary Fund (IMF). This was a good thing, considering an economy Japan’s size might not be too big to fail, but too big to save.

山一公司在第二天发生了令人震惊的内爆，这是日本战后历史上最大的企业倒闭事件，它使日本这个当时的第二大经济体与印度尼西亚、马来西亚、韩国和泰国一样陷入动荡。对于萨默斯来说，11 月 24 日是与日本官员（包括时任首相桥本龙太郎）和国际货币基金组织工作人员进行疯狂面对面会谈的马拉松。一天结束时，萨默斯所能提供的最乐观的评估是，日本可能不需要国际货币基金组织（IMF）的救助。这是一件好事，因为考虑到日本这样规模的经济体可能不是大到无法倒闭，而是大到无法拯救。



The next day, Hashimoto sought to buttress the point by making a pledge that seemed insignificant at the time. He said Japan is considering a variety of measures to support its shaky financial system, including using public money to bail out the nation’s debt-strapped banks. “Japanese citizens, parliament, and the ruling Liberal Democratic Party are all conducting serious debate on this matter, and I’m watching it with real interest,” Hashimoto said in Vancouver on November 25. “I’m looking at all possible options and considering further policy steps.”

第二天，桥本为强化这一点，做出了一个在当时看来微不足道的承诺。他说，日本正在考虑采取各种措施来支持其摇摇欲坠的金融体系，其中包括动用公共资金来救助该国负债累累的银行。"11月25日，桥本在温哥华表示："日本国民、国会和执政党自民党都在就此事进行认真的讨论，我也在以真正的兴趣关注此事。"我正在研究所有可能的选择，并考虑进一步的政策措施。"



The “options” and “steps” to follow would play a big role in why Japan’s first lost decade, the 1990s, would give way to a second and perhaps even a third. Pinpointing the exact moment when modern-day Japan became Japan is fraught with risk and subjectivity. But the downfall of Japan’s oldest securities house in 1997 offers a variety of fascinating bookends. Between 1997 and 1998, for example, a year of historic upheaval and big layoffs, Japan’s suicide rate jumped 35 percent and has remained around 30,000 per year ever since.

日本失去的第一个十年，即 20 世纪 90 年代，为何会让位于第二个甚至第三个十年，"选择 "和 "步骤 "将发挥重要作用。确定现代日本成为日本的确切时间充满了风险和主观性。但日本历史最悠久的证券公司在 1997 年的衰落却提供了各种引人入胜的线索。例如，1997 至 1998 年间，日本经历了历史性的动荡和大裁员，自杀率飙升了 35%，此后一直保持在每年 3 万人左右。





Yamaichi was founded in 1897, at the height of the Meiji Restoration, a period of enormous political, economic, and social change that marked Japan’s emergence as a modern power. In the years following U.S. Commodore Matthew Perry’s arrival in Tokyo Harbor in 1853 and the end of the Tokugawa Shogunate in 1868, Japan sought to leave its feudal past behind and build a market economy. As the nineteenth century wore on, the seeds of Japan’s industrialization and economic rise were planted. It was during this era that family business conglomerates, or zaibatsu, bearing still-familiar names like Sumitomo, Mitsui, Mitsubishi, and Yasuda, began to dominate. These fabled giants would later make their way into Japanese pop culture, as well as Tom Clancy novels and Western video games like Grand Theft Auto. These early corporate formations eventually gave way to Japan’s better-known keiretsu system of large, state-protected conglomerates that dominated the economy in the twentieth century. Elements of the keiretsu’s corporate ways persist even today. The most obvious is the practice of strong parts of an organization carrying weaker ones. Another is the custom of cross-shareholdings, whereby companies friendly with each other loan shares of their companies to avoid hostile takeovers.

山一公司成立于 1897 年，当时正值明治维新的鼎盛时期，明治维新标志着日本崛起为现代强国，在政治、经济和社会方面都发生了巨大的变化。在美国准将马修-佩里于 1853 年抵达东京港、德川幕府于 1868 年灭亡之后的几年里，日本一直在努力摆脱封建统治，建立市场经济。随着 19 世纪的到来，日本工业化和经济崛起的种子已经播下。正是在这个时代，住友、三井、三菱和安田等耳熟能详的家族企业集团或财阀开始占据主导地位。这些传说中的巨头后来成为日本流行文化、汤姆-克兰西（Tom Clancy）小说和《侠盗猎车手》（Grand Theft Auto）等西方电子游戏的主角。这些早期的企业组织最终让位于日本更著名的 "经团体制"，即由国家保护的大型企业集团，它们在 20 世纪主导了日本的经济。直到今天，"经济人 "的企业方式中的一些元素依然存在。其中最明显的是组织中的强势部分与弱势部分相互依存的做法。另一种是交叉持股的习俗，即相互友好的公司借出各自公司的股份，以避免敌意收购。



As the 1800s were drawing to a close, Yamaichi opened its doors and persevered, decade after decade. It survived World War II and helped provide financing for the nation’s impressive rise from the rubble and its ambitions for global domination. From the economic launching point that was the 1964 Tokyo Olympics to the heady bubble days of the 1980s, Japan’s star rose and rose and its companies couldn’t lose. That was until an impossible thing happened as 1989 gave way to the 1990s—at least from the vantage point of top executives in Tokyo. The real estate prices Japanese conventional wisdom said could never fall did just that. The stock market that even many skeptics felt would never stop rising did as well. The proverbial music was stopping and Yamaichi President Shohei Nozawa was left without a chair.

在 19 世纪即将结束之际，山一公司敞开大门，十年如一日，坚持不懈。它在第二次世界大战中幸存下来，并为国家从废墟中崛起以及称霸全球的雄心壮志提供了资金支持。从 1964 年东京奥运会的经济起点，到 20 世纪 80 年代令人兴奋的泡沫经济时代，日本的明星不断冉冉升起，其公司也不甘示弱。直到 1989 年让位给 1990 年代，一件不可能的事情发生了--至少从东京高层管理人员的角度来看是这样。日本的传统观念认为房地产价格永远不会下跌，但事实就是如此。连许多持怀疑态度的人都认为永远不会停止上涨的股市也是如此。音乐戛然而止，山一社长野泽昌平没有了椅子。



Few Japanese can forget Nozawa’s tearful news conference following Yamaichi’s 1997 bankruptcy filing where, between sobs, he begged for mercy from the nation. As corporate theater goes, it was unbeatable. Television footage of the bawling Nozawa made the rounds again in February 2010, when Toyota Motor Corp. President Akio Toyoda wept openly at a Washington meeting with car dealers amid a series of safety lapses. Yet Toyoda was no match for Nozawa in the hanky department.

很少有日本人能够忘记野泽在山一公司于 1997 年申请破产后，在新闻发布会上声泪俱下、泣不成声地向全国人民求饶。就企业戏剧而言，这是无与伦比的。2010 年 2 月，当丰田汽车公司总裁丰田章男公开哭泣时，野泽嚎啕大哭的电视画面再次出现在人们面前。当时，丰田汽车公司总裁丰田章男在华盛顿与汽车经销商举行的会议上，因一系列安全事故而痛哭流涕。然而，丰田在手帕方面根本不是野泽的对手。



That November week started with one of the masters of Japan’s financial universe apologizing and Hashimoto saying he was “ashamed” the Finance Ministry didn’t spot the 265 billion yen ($2.6 billion) in hidden losses that brought the brokerage house down. And it seemed like an epochal turning point for Japanese bureaucrats. It’s often said, quite correctly, that prime ministers don’t run Japan, the bureaucracy does. These largely nameless, faceless policy makers had long decided which companies would live and die—which would get financing to grow and spread their tentacles abroad and which would stay modestly sized backwaters. Yet Yamaichi was a tantalizing example of markets deciding, Lehman Brothers–style. It was skeptical traders who ferreted out Yamaichi’s concealed losses and creative accounting. A week later, those same market sleuths were already on to a new target: Yasuda Trust & Banking Co., one of Japan’s biggest banks. Moody’s Investors Service had said it might knock its debt rating down to junk status. As Yasuda’s stock plunged, depositors lined up to withdraw their money, a scene all but unthinkable in wealthy, cosmopolitan, and finance-savvy Japan. Fear was in the Tokyo air. Yamaichi marked the first time Japan allowed a bank to fail in the five decades since World War II, and no one knew who would be next. Who else, a nation of 127 million wondered, might be hiding devastating losses on their balance sheets?

11 月的那个星期一开始，日本金融界的一位大师就道歉了，桥本说他感到 "羞愧 "的是，财务省没有发现导致经纪公司倒闭的 2,650 亿日元（26 亿美元）的隐藏损失。对于日本官僚来说，这似乎是一个划时代的转折点。人们常说，管理日本的不是首相，而是官僚机构。长期以来，这些不知名、不露面的政策制定者决定了哪些公司的生死--哪些公司可以获得融资，发展壮大并将触角伸向海外，哪些公司只能是规模不大的落后企业。然而，山一公司是一个诱人的例子，是雷曼兄弟式的市场决定。正是持怀疑态度的交易员发现了山一公司隐瞒的损失和创造性的会计。一周后，这些市场侦探又盯上了新的目标：日本最大的银行之一安田信托银行株式会社（Yasuda Trust & Banking Co.穆迪投资者服务公司（Moody's Investors Service）表示，可能将其债务评级降至垃圾级。随着安田银行股价暴跌，储户们排队取款，这在富裕、国际化和精通金融的日本是不可想象的。东京的空气中弥漫着恐惧。山一银行的倒闭标志着日本自二战以来的五十年间首次允许一家银行倒闭，没有人知道下一个倒闭的会是谁。这个拥有 1.27 亿人口的国家不禁要问，还有谁的资产负债表上可能隐藏着毁灭性的损失？



The same week Yamaichi failed, Daiwa Securities, Japan’s second-largest brokerage, held an emergency press conference to deny that it, too, was harboring massive losses. That November week is significant because it’s arguably the point when global markets began to understand the true depths of Japan’s bad-loan crisis and the breadth of the culture of concealment that enabled the problems to fester for many years and at the highest levels of government. It also, with the benefit of hindsight, could have been a major turning point for Japan’s approach to dealing with its bad-loan crisis.

就在山一倒闭的同一周，日本第二大券商大和证券召开紧急新闻发布会，否认自己也存在巨额亏损。11 月的那一周意义重大，因为可以说是全球市场开始了解日本不良贷款危机的真正深度，以及使问题持续发酵多年的政府最高层隐瞒文化的广度。事后看来，这也可能是日本处理不良贷款危机的一个重要转折点。



That Tokyo let Yamaichi, the oldest of the big four securities houses, fail was seen as heralding a wave of Schumpeter-esque reform. (Joseph Schumpeter was the Austrian economist who championed “creative destruction” and free markets to make nations more competitive.) Financial systems, after all, need to be seen as punishing their weakest links, especially if they lack the transparency global banking norms demand. Yet it would be five years before Japan began getting serious about forcing debt-laden banks to write off the 52.4 trillion yen ($500 billion) of bad loans the government admitted to the industry harboring. For example, in 2002, Standard & Poor’s put the number at three times that. That came under then–Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi (2001–2006), whose economy minister, Heizo Takenaka, clamped down on the banks.

东京让四大证券公司中历史最悠久的山一倒闭，被视为预示着熊彼特式的改革浪潮。(约瑟夫-熊彼特是奥地利经济学家，他倡导 "创造性破坏 "和自由市场，以提高国家竞争力）。毕竟，金融体系需要被视为对其最薄弱环节的惩罚，尤其是在缺乏全球银行业规范所要求的透明度的情况下。然而，五年后，日本才开始认真对待迫使负债累累的银行注销政府承认的 52.4 万亿日元（约合 5000 亿美元）不良贷款。例如，2002 年，标准普尔（Standard & Poor's）的数据是这个数字的三倍。那是在当时的首相小泉纯一郎（2001-2006 年）执政期间，他的经济大臣竹中平藏对银行进行了严厉打击。



In October 1998, Japan saw its next traumatic banking experience when Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan Ltd. (LTCB) crashed, this time under Hashimoto’s successor, Keizo Obuchi (1998–2000). Rather than allow one of the three main banks Japan used to fund its economic miracle to fail, Prime Minister Obuchi’s government took control as it launched what at the time was the world’s biggest banking industry rescue. The government moved to take over insolvent banks and recapitalize weak ones with a 60-trillion-yen fund. The bailouts continued under Obuchi’s successor, Yoshiro Mori (2000–2001), until Koizumi’s government said “enough.”

1998 年 10 月，日本长期信用银行（LTCB）倒闭，日本银行业再次遭受重创。(这次是在桥本的继任者小渊惠三（1998-2000 年）的领导下发生的。）小渊首相的政府没有让日本用来资助其经济奇迹的三大银行之一倒闭，而是控制了银行，启动了当时世界上最大的银行业救援行动。政府接管了资不抵债的银行，并利用 60 万亿日元的基金对实力较弱的银行进行资本重组。小渊的继任者森喜朗（2000-2001 年）继续实施救助，直到小泉政府说 "够了"。



Yet the five-plus years between Yamaichi’s crash and eventual Koizimi-era reckoning is a period Japan will never get back. It was a window of opportunity to rein in financial excesses, restructure the banking industry, and keep Hong Kong and Singapore from encroaching on Tokyo’s place as Asia’s premier financial center. How did Japan manage to delay painful and destabilizing change? By employing the so-called Bubble Fix, a term popularized by former Morgan Stanley economist Stephen Roach, whereby central bankers and government officials soothe markets with monetary and fiscal stimulants in the short run in ways that create financial imbalances in the long run, essentially curing bubbles with new ones.

然而，从山一崩盘到最终小泉时代的清算之间的五年多时间，日本再也回不去了。这是一个遏制金融过度、重组银行业、防止香港和新加坡蚕食东京作为亚洲首要金融中心地位的机会之窗。日本是如何推迟痛苦和不稳定的变革的呢？摩根士丹利（Morgan Stanley）前经济学家斯蒂芬-罗奇（Stephen Roach）提出了所谓的 "泡沫疗法"（Bubble Fix），即中央银行和政府官员在短期内通过货币和财政刺激来安抚市场，但从长期来看却造成了金融失衡，实质上是用新的泡沫来治疗泡沫。



It was during the turmoil of Yamaichi failure and LTCB’s nationalization that the Bank of Japan first cut interest rates to zero. That honor will always be Masaru Hayami’s. His unsteady run as Bank of Japan (BOJ) governor between March 1998 and March 2003 set the stage for the monetary policy regimes later adopted, to varying degrees, by Ben Bernanke at the Fed, Mario Draghi at the European Central Bank, and current BOJ leader Haruhiko Kuroda. The problem with this monetary largess is that it reduces the need for structural change and artificially pumps up asset prices. By creating the illusion of vibrancy in stocks and real estate, and in turn, entire economies, all this free money does more harm than good.

正是在山一破产和 LTCB 国有化的动荡时期，日本银行首次将利率降至零。这一荣誉将永远属于早见正治。他在 1998 年 3 月至 2003 年 3 月间担任日本央行行长期间的不稳定运作，为后来美联储的本-伯南克、欧洲央行的马里奥-德拉吉以及现任日本央行行长黑田东彦在不同程度上采用的货币政策制度奠定了基础。这种宽松货币政策的问题在于，它降低了结构性变革的必要性，人为地推高了资产价格。通过制造股票和房地产以及整个经济充满活力的假象，所有这些免费货币弊大于利。



Marc Faber, Hong Kong–based publisher of the Gloom, Boom, & Doom report, likens the last 15 years in markets to a relapsing alcoholic, and central banks to irresponsible bartenders. To dole out more booze, as monetary officials have been doing, is the wrong medicine. The problem, particularly in Japan’s case, is the lack of an exit strategy. Even when the world’s third-largest economy is churning out growth of, say, 3 percent, it’s more artificial than organic. Free money sapped the urgency from Japan Inc. at the very worst moment, just as it needed to keep up with a cast of growth stars in Asia, China included. All the liquidity the BOJ has been pumping into the economy since the 1990s was meant to support so-called zombie companies and industries that employ millions. In reality, it led to a zombification of the broader economy, complicating Prime Minister Abe’s revival efforts. Japan is still reluctant to abandon the strategies that propelled it into the orbit of Group of Seven nations.

马克-法贝尔（Marc Faber）是《阴郁、繁荣与末日》（Gloom, Boom, & Doom）报告的香港出版人，他将过去 15 年的市场比作一个复发的酒鬼，而中央银行则是不负责任的调酒师。像货币官员们一直在做的那样发放更多的酒，是错误的药物。问题在于缺乏退出策略，日本的情况尤其如此。即使世界第三大经济体实现了 3% 的增长，这也是人为的而非自然的。免费资金在最糟糕的时刻消耗了日本公司的紧迫感，而此时它正需要跟上包括中国在内的亚洲增长明星的步伐。自 20 世纪 90 年代以来，日本央行不断向经济注入流动性，旨在支持所谓的 "僵尸企业 "和雇用数百万员工的行业。实际上，这导致了更广泛经济的僵尸化，使安倍首相的复兴努力变得更加复杂。日本仍不愿放弃将其推向七国集团轨道的战略。



One problem was that even when Japan tweaked its regulatory system, its underlying core remained very much intact. In the 1980s, for example, Japan’s “convoy system,” whereby stronger banks protected weaker ones, survived, as did the moral hazard policy of not letting banks, large or small, fail. In the first half of the 1990s, even as banks began approaching failure, bankers still felt certain Tokyo wouldn’t let a major one fail. While Yamaichi’s collapse a few years later altered that view somewhat, Japan spent much of the decade of the 2000s bailing out financial institutions. It can be argued that Japan’s entire economy operates in a convoy-system capacity. Because Japan lacks an expansive national safety net, banks inadvertently became one. The government would bail out banks so that they could keep even the dodgiest of companies afloat—and unemployment low.

一个问题是，即使日本对其监管体系进行了调整，但其基本核心仍然完好无损。例如，在 20 世纪 80 年代，日本的 "护航系统"（即实力较强的银行保护实力较弱的银行）以及不允许大小银行倒闭的道德风险政策得以延续。20 世纪 90 年代前半期，即使银行开始濒临倒闭，银行家们仍然确信东京不会让一家大银行倒闭。虽然几年后山一银行的倒闭在一定程度上改变了这种看法，但日本在 2000 年代的大部分时间里都在拯救金融机构。可以说，日本的整个经济是以护航系统的方式运行的。由于日本缺乏广泛的国家安全网，银行无意中成为了一个安全网。政府会救助银行，这样即使是最糟糕的公司也能维持下去，同时降低失业率。



This arrangement deadened the urgency for banks to write down the bad loans of the past, but so did regulatory structure. In an October 2001 paper, Bank for International Settlements economist Hiroshi Nakaso explored the two main structural problems behind Japan’s foot-dragging both on recognizing the depth of its nonperforming-loan crisis and addressing it: insufficient provisioning for debts that go bad and totally inadequate transparency.

这种安排抑制了银行冲销过去不良贷款的紧迫性，但监管结构也是如此。在 2001 年 10 月的一篇论文中，国际清算银行经济学家 Hiroshi Nakaso 探讨了日本在认识不良贷款危机的严重性和解决这一危机方面所存在的两大结构性问题：对坏账的拨备不足和透明度完全不够。



“Public disclosure on NPLs was virtually non-existent before 1992,” Nakaso wrote.

"Nakaso 写道："在 1992 年之前，几乎不存在关于不良贷款的公开披露。



The initial disclosure requirement introduced that year was based on tax law standards and covered a limited range of loans to legally bankrupt borrowers and loans past due 180 days or more. Moreover, borrowers’ creditworthiness was not necessarily reflected. For example, if a borrower close to bankruptcy had two loans of which one was performing and the other was past due more than 180 days, the disclosure standard required only the latter to be included in the disclosed figures. Consequently, a substantial portion of NPLs remained outside the scope of public disclosure.

当年引入的最初披露要求是基于税法标准，涵盖范围有限，包括向合法破产的借款人发放的贷款和逾期 180 天或以上的贷款。此外，借款人的信用状况也不一定能反映出来。例如，如果一个濒临破产的借款人有两笔贷款，其中一笔正在履约，另一笔逾期超过 180 天，披露标准只要求将后者列入披露数字。因此，很大一部分 NPL 仍在公开披露范围之外。





Also in 1992, Lombard economist Brian Reading published his prescient Japan: The Coming Collapse, tracing the nation’s economic miracle, one that formed the core of a development model pursued from South Korea to China to Thailand. The former Economist editor has described Japan as “communism with beauty spots, not capitalism with warts.” Hyperbole aside, Reading’s point is that the mechanics of Japan Inc. have long been rigged in labyrinthine ways to thwart the forces of capitalism.

同样在 1992 年，伦巴第大学的经济学家布莱恩-雷丁出版了他先知先觉的《即将崩溃的日本》一书：该书追溯了日本的经济奇迹，这一奇迹构成了从韩国到中国再到泰国的发展模式的核心。这位前《经济学人》编辑将日本描述为 "有美丽斑点的共产主义，而不是有疣的资本主义"。撇开夸张的说法不谈，雷丁的观点是，日本公司的机制长期以来一直以迷宫般的方式操纵着资本主义的力量。



The core of this system is often referred to as Japan’s “iron triangle” of politicians, bureaucrats, and big business, each occupying a corner. Each facilitates the others in achieving their goals and aspirations—rising status for politicians, power for bureaucrats, and riches for corporate chieftains.

这一制度的核心通常被称为日本的 "铁三角"，即政客、官僚和大企业各占一角。每个人都为其他人实现其目标和愿望提供便利--政客的地位上升，官僚的权力扩大，企业巨头的财富增加。



“Each side involved exchanges of favors for money,” Reading said.

"雷丁说："每一方都涉及到用金钱交换人情。



Under the single-vote multimember electoral constituencies, factional party politicians needed money to buy votes and career advancement. They delegated executive power, and to a large extent policy formulation, to bureaucrats. The bureaucrats used their power to do big business favors and were rewarded with sinecures on retirement. In return for preferential treatment, big business supplied politicians with money. Corruption was endemic.

在单票制的多议员选区下，派系政党政治家需要用金钱来购买选票和职业晋升。他们将行政权下放给官僚，并在很大程度上将政策制定权下放给官僚。官僚们利用手中的权力为大企业谋取利益，并在退休后获得终身职位。作为优待的回报，大企业向政客们提供金钱。腐败盛行。





In Reading’s view, one could also call this a “plywood triangle,” with layers of polygons stuck together. “Each involved an incestuous relationship between individual industries or services, the ministerial or divisional bureaucrats that regulated them, and the politicians who specialized on representing its interests,” Reading said.

雷丁认为，这也可以被称为 "胶合板三角"，是由一层层的多边形粘在一起的。"雷丁说："每一个三角都涉及个别行业或服务、监管这些行业或服务的部级或处级官僚以及专门代表这些行业或服务利益的政治家之间的不伦关系。



Industrialists, bureaucrats and politicians bonded with their triangular partners, colluding to protect their own patch against all others including divisions with ministries, notably in the Ministry of Finance. Each triangle was an independent fiefdom. There was no overall authority to impose change from above. Cabinets rubber-stamped compromise agreements. There is no room here to explain how the system evolved. Suffice it to say there was no central planning. Power was dispersed between segregated boxes.

实业家、官僚和政客与他们的三角合作伙伴紧密联系在一起，相互勾结以保护自己的地盘不受其他任何一方的侵犯，包括与各部委的分歧，尤其是财政部的分歧。每个三角关系都是一个独立的领地。没有从上层强加变革的总体权威。内阁在妥协协议上盖橡皮图章。这里没有余地解释这一制度是如何演变的。只需说明没有中央计划即可。权力被分散在不同的盒子里。





This arrangement worked wonders for decades, with gross domestic product (GDP) growth averaging nearly 9 percent from the early 1950s into the early 1970s. But then Japan ran into what Reading calls its “three-strikes-and-you’re-out” problem. It first began to emerge in the mid-1960s when the nation’s obsession with a high savings rate sowed the seeds of deflation. Strike two was the breakdown of the Bretton Woods exchange-rate system, which made it harder to maintain an undervalued currency. The international oil crisis of the early 1970s was strike three, dealing a sizable blow to the nation’s capital-intensive industrialization.

这种安排在数十年间创造了奇迹，从 20 世纪 50 年代初到 70 年代初，国内生产总值（GDP）平均增长率接近 9%。但后来，日本遇到了雷丁所说的 "三振出局 "问题。这个问题最早出现在 20 世纪 60 年代中期，当时日本对高储蓄率的痴迷埋下了通货紧缩的种子。第二击是布雷顿森林汇率体系的崩溃，这使得维持低估的货币变得更加困难。20 世纪 70 年代初的国际石油危机是第三击，对美国的资本密集型工业化造成了巨大打击。



Japan’s remedy was its first crack at the Bubble Fix. In the 1960s and 1970s, structural changes were needed to reinvigorate growth. But that would mean upsetting the carefully calibrated ways of Japan Inc. It also would have required considerable political will. Instead, three temporary fixes were agreed upon: engineering a current-account surplus, large budget deficits, and extremely easy credit to boost asset markets.

日本的补救措施是对泡沫修复的首次尝试。在 20 世纪 60 年代和 70 年代，需要进行结构改革来重振经济增长。但这意味着要打乱日本公司精心调整的方式。这也需要相当大的政治意愿。相反，当时达成了三个临时性的解决方案：设计经常账户盈余、巨额预算赤字和极度宽松的信贷以刺激资产市场。



The rationale, Reading said, was that

雷丁说，理由是



excess savings could be lent to foreigners to buy Japan’s excess products. A foreigners’ financial deficit, also a Japanese current account surplus, would then absorb the private sector’s financial surplus. This was the solution to strike one in the late 1960s. But strike two, Bretton Woods collapse, ruled this out as a permanent one. Foreigners are only willing and able to run deficits and debts for a certain period. When they cease to do so, the exchange rate appreciates. Strike three, the oil price explosions, temporarily eliminated current account surpluses and absorbed excess savings by adversely affecting Japan’s terms of trade and thereby reducing real income.

多余的储蓄可以借给外国人购买日本多余的产品。这样，外国人的金融赤字，也就是日本的经常账户盈余，就可以吸收私营部门的金融盈余。这就是 20 世纪 60 年代末第一轮冲击的解决方案。但第二次打击--布雷顿森林体系崩溃--使这一方案无法永久实施。外国人只愿意并能够在一定时期内经营赤字和债务。当他们不再这样做时，汇率就会升值。第三击，石油价格爆炸，通过对日本的贸易条件产生不利影响，从而减少实际收入，暂时消除了经常账户盈余，吸收了过多的储蓄。





U.S. policies during President Ronald Reagan’s days from 1981 to 1989, primarily loose fiscal and tight monetary policies, gave Japan a break as the dollar surged. But then the dollar plunged and the yen skyrocketed, thanks to the so-called Plaza Accord in 1985 that Japan agreed to and later regretted. When economists call it one of the greatest policy mistakes Japan ever made, that’s saying a lot. Japan, after all, amassed the world’s largest public debt, cut interest rates to zero, and scuttled myriad recoveries with bad policies. Some observers think all may pale in comparison to Japan’s agreement to let the yen strengthen from 260 yen per dollar to around 125 yen per dollar.

1981 年至 1989 年罗纳德-里根总统时期的美国政策，主要是宽松的财政政策和紧缩的货币政策，在美元飙升时给了日本喘息的机会。但随后美元暴跌，日元飙升，这要归功于 1985 年所谓的《广场协议》。当经济学家称其为日本有史以来最大的政策失误之一时，这已经说明了很多问题。毕竟，日本积累了世界上最大的公共债务，将利率降至零，并以糟糕的政策破坏了无数次经济复苏。一些观察家认为，与日本同意让日元从 1 美元兑 260 日元升值到 1 美元兑 125 日元相比，这一切都显得微不足道。



“The currency realignment was too sharp and too large,” said Stephen Jen, cofounder of SLJ Macro Partners LLP in London. “Such a sharp appreciation in the currency led to an easy monetary stance that nurtured the financial bubbles (equities and properties), mainly because the BOJ observed that the consumer price index was low, and therefore [it was] safe to run easy monetary policies.” He added that “in conjunction with a naïve and short-sighted BOJ, it helped create such large bubbles that helped put Japan out of contention for a generation.”

"伦敦 SLJ Macro Partners LLP 的联合创始人 Stephen Jen 说："货币调整过于急剧，幅度过大。"货币大幅升值导致宽松的货币政策助长了金融泡沫（股票和房地产），这主要是因为日本央行认为消费者物价指数较低，因此实施宽松的货币政策是安全的。他补充说，"再加上日本央行的天真和短视，助长了如此巨大的泡沫，使日本在一代人的时间里失去了竞争力"。



That left Japan turning to massive budget deficits and ultralow interest rates. It’s sobering that amid all the talk in 2013 about the Fed finding an exit strategy from quantitative easing, Japan has yet to find its own. Never mind the monetary exploits of the last few years; Japan still needs to find an exit from the 1990s. It hasn’t learned how to live without zero interest rates and the world’s biggest public debt and it might not for decades to come.

这使得日本不得不转向大规模预算赤字和超低利率。令人唏嘘的是，在2013年美联储寻求退出量化宽松政策的言论甚嚣尘上之际，日本却仍未找到自己的退出策略。且不论过去几年的货币政策，日本仍需找到摆脱上世纪90年代的出路。它还没有学会如何在没有零利率和世界上最大的公共债务的情况下生活，而且可能在未来几十年都不会学会。



If anything, Abenomics is nudging Japan further—and faster—down this uncharted and dangerous path. The BOJ’s unprecedented stimulus, including a doubling of the monetary base, is enlivening asset markets as rarely seen before and drumming up fresh optimism that Japan’s economy is back. Meanwhile, Abe’s first act after becoming prime minister for the second time in December 2012 was unleashing a 10.3 trillion yen fiscal-spending package—that, in a nation in which public debt is roughly 250 percent of gross domestic product.

如果说安倍经济学在推动日本在这条未知的危险道路上越走越远、越走越快的话。日本央行史无前例的刺激政策，包括将货币基础翻倍，正前所未有地活跃着资产市场，并为日本经济复苏带来了新的乐观情绪。与此同时，安倍晋三在 2012 年 12 月第二次出任首相后的第一件事就是推出了 10.3 万亿日元的财政支出计划，而日本的公共债务约占国内生产总值的 250%。



Monetary and fiscal stimulus is a good start, but what really matters is Abe’s program to deregulate an overmanaged economy as a means of increasing Japan’s competiveness and boosting job creation. That means sweeping tax reform, deregulation, joining free-trade agreements such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership, empowering women, supporting entrepreneurs, and increasing productivity. Japanese have heard lots of talk of economic upgrades over the last decade but have seen almost zero action. Until Abe implements these supply-side changes, his stimulus amounts to little more than papering over economic cracks with easy money. All low rates and capital injections from central banks offer markets is breathing room. They treat symptoms of the problem, not the underlying disease, and may just be inflating another giant asset bubble. In April 2013, a report by Merrill Lynch economists in Tokyo asked this tantalizing question: “Shouldn’t Abe stand for Asset Bubble Economics?” Remember that Japan’s interest rates have been at zero, or well below it, for more than a dozen years and it still has deflation. Japan’s economy has yet to return to normal.

货币和财政刺激是一个良好的开端，但真正重要的是安倍的计划，即放松对过度管理的经济的管制，以此来提高日本的竞争力并促进创造就业。这意味着全面的税制改革、放松管制、加入跨太平洋伙伴关系等自由贸易协定、赋予妇女权力、支持企业家以及提高生产率。在过去十年中，日本人听到了很多关于经济升级的言论，但几乎没有看到任何行动。在安倍实施这些供给方面的变革之前，他的刺激政策不过是用宽松的货币来掩盖经济裂缝。央行的低利率和注资为市场提供的只是喘息空间。它们治标不治本，可能只会吹起另一个巨大的资产泡沫。2013 年 4 月，美林证券驻东京的经济学家在一份报告中提出了这样一个诱人的问题："安倍晋三不应该代表资产泡沫经济吗？"请记住，十多年来，日本的利率一直处于零或远低于零的水平，但仍然存在通货紧缩。日本经济尚未恢复正常。



Then again, normal is a relative word. It can be argued that Japan’s entire postwar economy is a bubble of sorts—of GDP, not just assets. The bubble years of the 1980s sent Japan’s cost of living soaring with asset prices, putting Tokyo and Osaka at the very top of most-expensive-city tables. It meant that the value of all goods and services produced in a given year was being skewed higher. And while real estate and stock prices fell sharply during the 1990s and 2000s, consumer prices didn’t. Japan’s deflation has always had a glacial, almost hydraulic quality. Costs ratcheted down steadily, but genteelly enough that the falling-price trend didn’t destabilize the nation as economists like, say, Nobel laureate Milton Friedman had warned. What Friedman called the “scourge of deflation,” households from Yokohama to Fukuoka merely came to accept—and in some ways, even enjoy.

不过，正常是一个相对的词。可以说，日本战后的整个经济都是一种泡沫，不仅是资产泡沫，还有国内生产总值泡沫。20 世纪 80 年代的泡沫经济时代，日本的生活成本随着资产价格飙升，东京和大阪在最昂贵城市排行榜上名列前茅。这意味着，特定年份生产的所有商品和服务的价值都被拉高了。20 世纪 90 年代和 2000 年代，房地产和股票价格大幅下跌，但消费价格却没有下跌。日本的通货紧缩一直是冰火两重天，几乎是水到渠成。成本稳步下降，但足够温和，价格下降趋势并没有像诺贝尔经济学奖得主米尔顿-弗里德曼等人警告的那样破坏国家稳定。弗里德曼所说的 "通货紧缩之祸"，从横滨到福冈的家庭都能接受，甚至在某些方面还乐在其中。



In general, deflation is a dreadful phenomenon. It slams financial assets, boosts debt-servicing costs, and undermines corporate profits. It erodes business confidence, lowers tax revenue, and is a “third-rail” issue to many foreign investors, who often avoid economies grappling with it. For consumers, though, deflation offers a kind of stealth tax cut as households regain some purchasing power. It has helped make a wildly expensive country a bit less wildly expensive.

总的来说，通货紧缩是一种可怕的现象。它打击金融资产，增加偿债成本，损害企业利润。它侵蚀商业信心，降低税收，对许多外国投资者来说是一个 "三轨 "问题，他们通常会避开受其困扰的经济体。不过，对于消费者来说，通货紧缩提供了一种隐形减税，因为家庭恢复了一些购买力。通货紧缩使一个物价飞涨的国家不再物价飞涨。



Even after China spooked Japan into restructuring, a distribution system based on multiple layers of intermediaries and regulations that favor giant, established companies with bloated staffs over newer ones keeps prices artificially high. Defenses against foreign competition also contribute to everything costing too much. Institutionalized inefficiencies and a dearth of competition force consumers to pay dearly for things like rice, electronics, vegetables, fruit, and clothing that could be flown more cheaply from China than driven in from 10 miles away.

即使在中国刺激日本进行结构调整之后，基于多层中介机构的分销体系，以及有利于拥有臃肿员工的老牌巨头公司而非新兴公司的法规，仍然人为地使价格居高不下。抵御外国竞争的措施也导致一切成本过高。制度化的低效率和缺乏竞争迫使消费者为大米、电子产品、蔬菜、水果和服装等商品支付高昂的价格，而这些商品从中国空运过来要比从 10 英里之外开车运过来便宜得多。



Yet deflation has helped root out some of these inefficiencies. It prodded bloated companies to downsize and made corporate Japan think twice about the feasibility of uncompetitive industries. Deflation also nudged banks to reduce bad loans. A dozen years of waiting for growth to bail out Japan came to naught. It’s no coincidence that bad-debt writedowns accelerated once it became clear that deflation wasn’t a passing fad. So what passes as normal in Japan might not anywhere else.

然而，通货紧缩有助于根除其中一些效率低下的问题。通货紧缩促使臃肿的公司缩减规模，并让日本企业三思而后行，考虑不具竞争力行业的可行性。通货紧缩还促使银行减少不良贷款。等待经济增长拯救日本的十几年化为乌有。一旦人们意识到通货紧缩并非一时兴起，坏账减记的速度就会加快，这绝非巧合。因此，在日本被视为正常的现象在其他地方可能就不正常了。



Will the United States do better? “Since the financial crisis, the U.S. economic situation has taken on many of the characteristics of Japan,” said Barry Bosworth, an economist at the Brookings Institution in Washington. As Bosworth sees it, monetary policy has been exhausted, quantitative easing largely ineffectual, huge fiscal stimulus insufficient to boost demand left America with record deficits that can’t be sustained, and the political system is as dysfunctional as it’s ever been.

美国会做得更好吗？"华盛顿布鲁金斯学会（Brookings Institution）经济学家巴里-博斯沃思（Barry Bosworth）说："自金融危机以来，美国的经济形势呈现出许多日本的特征。在博斯沃思看来，货币政策已经穷途末路，量化宽松政策基本无效，巨额财政刺激措施不足以刺激需求，使得美国的赤字创下历史新高，难以为继，而政治体制则一如既往地功能失调。



Yet many believe the United States will indeed fare better, including none other than former Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke. At a press conference on April 25, 2012, Akio Fujii, a Washington-based reporter for the Nikkei newspaper, asked Bernanke if the United States can escape Japanization. Here is Bernanke’s response:

然而，许多人认为美国的情况确实会好一些，其中包括前美联储主席本-伯南克（Ben Bernanke）。在 2012 年 4 月 25 日的新闻发布会上，《日经新闻》驻华盛顿记者 Akio Fujii 问伯南克，美国能否摆脱日本化。以下是伯南克的回答：



I would draw two distinctions between the U.S. and Japan, or the Japanese experience. The first, as I mentioned earlier—and I think this is very important—is that we acted aggressively and pre-emptively to avoid deflation. Now of course Japan had a much bigger bubble and a much bigger shock when the bubble collapsed, and so these differences may be certainly understandable. But again, we did avoid deflation. The other thing which I think we have done reasonably well here in the United States was that we moved fairly quickly to make sure that our banks were recapitalized and were recognizing their bad assets. And I think the stress tests that we conducted last month are good evidence that the U.S. banking system is considerably stronger and, indeed, much more resilient than it was a couple of years ago. So those two things are positives and would tend to suggest that we will avoid some of the problems that Japan has faced. That being said, I think it’s always better to be humble and just avoid being too confident. And we need to continue to maintain strong monetary policy support to make sure that the economy continues on a recovery path and returns to a more normal situation.

我认为美国和日本或日本的经验有两个不同之处。首先，正如我之前提到的--我认为这一点非常重要--我们采取了积极的、先发制人的行动来避免通货紧缩。当然，日本的泡沫更大，泡沫崩溃时的冲击也更大，因此这些差异当然是可以理解的。但我们还是避免了通货紧缩。在美国，我认为我们做得比较好的另一件事是，我们相当迅速地确保了银行的资本重组，并确认了它们的不良资产。我认为，我们上个月进行的压力测试很好地证明，美国银行体系比几年前强大得多，而且确实更具弹性。因此，这两件事都是积极的，并倾向于表明我们将避免日本所面临的一些问题。尽管如此，我认为谦虚和避免过于自信总是比较好的。我们需要继续保持强有力的货币政策支持，以确保经济继续走在复苏的道路上，并恢复到更正常的状态。





All this remains to be seen. Many economists would argue that the period following 2008, after the crash of Lehman Brothers and many of Wall Street’s biggest players, ushered in the start of at least a semi–lost decade for the United States. While GDP growth returned, the Standard & Poor’s 500 roared, and house prices stabilized, unemployment remains stubbornly near 7 percent. What’s more, a weak global economy means U.S. stimulus efforts lack the traction President Barack Obama expected. Political paralysis also should be a concern. On the question of whether the United States will go the way of Japan, the jury is very much out.

这一切仍有待观察。许多经济学家认为，2008 年雷曼兄弟和华尔街许多大公司倒闭后，美国至少开始了半失落的十年。虽然 GDP 恢复增长，标准普尔 500 指数飙升，房价趋于稳定，但失业率仍顽固地保持在 7% 附近。更重要的是，全球经济疲软意味着美国的经济刺激措施缺乏巴拉克-奥巴马总统预期的吸引力。政治瘫痪也应引起关注。至于美国是否会走日本的老路，目前尚无定论。



Yet there are two reasons to worry: denial and easy money. Yes, U.S. authorities, as Bernanke argues, acted faster than their Japanese peers. American banks also came clean quickly about the magnitude of the toxic assets on their books and disposed of them expeditiously, certainly compared with Japan’s bank executives. U.S. accounting rules make it harder to hide losses, and America eschewed the practice of cross-holdings of equities, whereby friendly companies buy each other’s shares to avoid outside pressure, that can wreak havoc on Japanese balance sheets.

然而，有两个原因令人担忧：否认和宽松的货币政策。是的，正如伯南克所言，美国当局的行动比日本同行更快。美国银行也很快坦白了账面上有毒资产的规模，并迅速处理了这些资产，当然，与日本的银行高管相比是如此。美国的会计规则使得隐藏损失变得更加困难，而且美国避免了交叉持有股票的做法，即友好的公司相互购买对方的股票以避免外部压力，这种做法会对日本的资产负债表造成严重破坏。



The big problem facing the United States, though, is about banking structure—just as it was with Japan. Even after the debacle of 2008, U.S. regulators and investors are hawking the appealing tale of a chastened but sophisticated and efficient financial system that can manage risk once again. Yet the United States has merely treated the symptoms of its underlying illness. Increasing capital adequacy ratios and imposing greater transparency on Wall Street is a good start. What’s needed is an end to the too-big-to-fail era that still persists today. If another global crisis were to flare up—say, Europe unraveling or China crashing—U.S. financial companies might prove to be too big to save. To me, giant investment banks are America’s chaebol, just as they were Japan’s in the 1990s. The reference here is to the huge, family-run conglomerates that tower over the Korean economy and suck up much of the economic and political oxygen. When the economy is good, they roll in profits, influence, and hubris. When the economy goes bad, these giants can pull everything else down with them.

不过，美国面临的最大问题是银行结构--就像日本面临的问题一样。即使在经历了 2008 年的灾难之后，美国监管机构和投资者仍在兜售一个诱人的故事：一个经过挫折但成熟高效的金融体系能够再次管理风险。然而，美国只是治标不治本。提高资本充足率和加强华尔街的透明度是一个良好的开端。我们需要的是结束如今依然存在的 "太大而不能倒 "的时代。如果另一场全球危机爆发，比如欧洲解体或中国崩溃，美国的金融公司可能会被证明大到无法拯救。在我看来，巨型投资银行就是美国的财阀，就像 20 世纪 90 年代的日本财阀一样。这里指的是庞大的家族企业集团，它们在韩国经济中高高在上，吸走了大量的经济和政治氧气。经济形势好的时候，它们的利润、影响力和傲慢都会滚滚而来。当经济不景气时，这些巨头就会拖累其他一切。



Bernanke’s quantitative-easing experiment is another question mark. Over time, the Fed will find that politicians, bankers, investors, and businesspeople alike get addicted to free money all too easily and clamor for more. Once central banks start embracing assets such as corporate debt, commercial paper, mortgage-backed securities, exchange-traded funds, real estate trusts, and the like, they tend to get stuck. That’s especially so in nations carrying large, and growing, debt burdens. That’s the thing about the global banking system going Islamic—it’s hard to come back. Sharia law bars the receiving or paying interest on loans or deposits and a huge market infrastructure has been built to facilitate clients that include wildly rich Persian Gulf oil tycoons. Yet hasn’t this industry in a sense been pirated by the BOJ, Fed and other central banks offering interest-free loans? As U.S. President Richard Nixon, echoing Milton Friedman, famously quipped in 1971: “We are all Keynesians now.” By 2009, we had all become Islamic bankers.

伯南克的量化宽松实验是另一个问号。随着时间的推移，美联储会发现，政客、银行家、投资者和商人都很容易对免费货币上瘾，并要求更多的免费货币。一旦中央银行开始拥抱公司债务、商业票据、抵押贷款支持证券、交易所交易基金、房地产信托等资产，他们往往会陷入困境。这在债务负担沉重且不断增加的国家尤其如此。这就是全球银行系统伊斯兰化的问题所在--很难回头。伊斯兰教法禁止收取或支付贷款或存款的利息，而且已经建立了庞大的市场基础设施，为包括波斯湾石油大亨在内的客户提供便利。然而，从某种意义上说，这一行业不是已经被日本央行、美联储和其他提供无息贷款的中央银行盗版了吗？正如美国总统理查德-尼克松在 1971 年引用米尔顿-弗里德曼的名言时所说："我们现在都是凯恩斯主义者："我们现在都是凯恩斯主义者"。到 2009 年，我们都成了伊斯兰银行家。



In April 2013, IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde asked her staff to examine what might happen to the global economy when major central banks raise interest rates again. She’s wasting their time. For if Japan can teach the world anything, it’s that slashing rates to zero and beyond is a lot easier than restoring them to normalcy. Japan is on its sixth central-bank governor since its bubble burst in 1990, and Kuroda is doubling down on quantitative easing in ways his predecessors never dared.

2013 年 4 月，国际货币基金组织总裁克里斯蒂娜-拉加德（Christine Lagarde）要求她的员工研究当主要央行再次加息时，全球经济可能会发生什么变化。她这是在浪费时间。因为如果说日本能给世界带来什么启示的话，那就是将利率降至零甚至更低比恢复正常利率要容易得多。自 1990 年泡沫破灭以来，日本已经迎来了第六位央行行长，而黑田东彦正在加倍推行量化宽松政策，这是他的前任们从未敢做的。



What the IMF really should be studying is how the economics textbooks written by Friedman, John Maynard Keynes, and Adam Smith are losing relevance in this world of zero. Japan, of course, is Exhibit A. The nation has been living with zero rates for so many years that they seem, well, rational. Yet under the surface, credit spreads have come to mean little, not when the underlying assets on which they are based are drugged up on monetary stimulants. Bank balance sheets are muddied, as are the government’s books as it becomes harder to pinpoint where a central bank’s holdings begin and end. Corporate shenanigans are easier to disguise, too. Why bother with creative accounting when liquidity is plentiful with compliments of the central bank.

国际货币基金组织真正应该研究的是，弗里德曼、约翰-梅纳德-凯恩斯和亚当-斯密编写的经济学教科书是如何在这个零世界中失去意义的。当然，日本就是一个例证。这个国家已经在零利率的环境下生活了这么多年，以至于零利率看起来很理性。然而，从表面上看，信贷息差的意义已经不大，因为作为息差基础的资产已经被货币刺激剂麻醉。银行的资产负债表变得模糊不清，政府的账目也是如此，因为央行所持资产的起点和终点变得更加难以确定。企业的诡计也更容易掩饰。既然中央银行提供了充足的流动性，又何必费心去做创造性的会计呢？



In reality, ultralow rates have done more to undermine Japan than revive it. It has concentrated capital in nonproductive sectors such as construction, telecommunications, and power, and it starves others—like startup companies—that could fuel job growth. At the same time, it has reduced the urgency for policy makers to make industries, from electronics to steel, more competitive and innovative. Zero rates also deadened Japan’s resolve at the worst possible moment—just as an ascendant China was grabbing the number two economy spot in 2010.

实际上，超低利率对日本的破坏大于振兴。它使资本集中在建筑、电信和电力等非生产性行业，并使其他行业（如初创公司）陷入困境，而这些行业可以促进就业增长。同时，零利率降低了政策制定者提高从电子到钢铁等行业的竞争力和创新力的紧迫性。零利率还在最糟糕的时刻扼杀了日本的决心--而这恰恰是在 2010 年，崛起的中国正在抢占第二大经济体的位置。



Finally, a subzero monetary environment could be setting Japan up for a reckoning of a magnitude the world has never seen. Someday, bond traders will decide that a fast-aging nation carrying debt load far in excess of its $6 trillion worth of output is ripe for a huge correction—that 10-year bond yields below 1 percent for a nation with that debt profile make no sense. For now, though, all’s well in Bondland, where Japan’s IOUs are a safe haven in a world of shaky investments.

最后，零度以下的货币环境可能会使日本面临世界上从未见过的大清算。总有一天，债券交易员们会认为，一个快速衰老的国家背负着远远超过其 6 万亿美元产值的债务负担，进行大幅调整的时机已经成熟--对于一个负债累累的国家来说，低于 1% 的 10 年期债券收益率毫无意义。不过现在，日本的债券市场一切安好，日本的欠条是这个投资动荡世界的避风港。



The United States must execute its exit from quantitative easing (QE) as soon as financial conditions allow, to avoid Japan’s plight. Bernanke began the process in earnest on December 18, 2013, by moving to trim the Fed’s monthly bond purchases to $75 billion from $85 billion. But it won’t be easy politically to accelerate the so-called tapering process. It doesn’t take a vivid imagination to picture the congressional inquisition that would greet the Fed’s moves toward monetary normalcy. Markets won’t much like it either; the Fed going further to scrap QE would signal that a $3 trillion trade is about to be unwound. And the economic fallout could be considerable. The Fed’s massive portfolio of mortgage-backed securities is a case in point. In an economy as housing-centric as America’s, selling those off could devastate a sector closely tied to consumer confidence.

美国必须在金融条件允许的情况下尽快退出量化宽松政策（QE），以避免陷入日本的困境。伯南克于2013年12月18日认真地开始了这一进程，将美联储的月度债券购买量从850亿美元削减至750亿美元。但要加快所谓的缩减进程，在政治上并非易事。不需要丰富的想象力，就能想象出迎接美联储货币正常化举措的国会质询。市场也不会喜欢这样；美联储进一步取消量化宽松将意味着 3 万亿美元的交易即将解除。而且经济后果可能相当严重。美联储庞大的抵押贷款支持证券投资组合就是一个很好的例子。在美国这样一个以住房为中心的经济体中，抛售这些证券可能会摧毁一个与消费者信心密切相关的行业。



Yet an exit must be found to avoid the scenario Jeremy Grantham, cofounder of global investment management fund GMO LLC, fears: that pretty much every asset class, everywhere in the world, is in the midst of a bubble of some kind and that each imbalance reinforces another. “Sustained strong fundamentals and sustained easy credit go one better: They allow for continued reinforcement,” the Boston-based Grantham argued. “The more leverage you take, the better you do. The better you do, the more leverage you take.”

全球投资管理基金 GMO LLC 联合创始人杰里米-格兰瑟姆（Jeremy Grantham）担心，世界上几乎所有资产类别都存在某种泡沫，而且每一种失衡都会强化另一种泡沫。"持续强劲的基本面和持续宽松的信贷更进一步：总部位于波士顿的格兰瑟姆认为："持续强劲的基本面和持续宽松的信贷会带来更大的好处：它们会继续强化泡沫。"你利用的杠杆越多，你就做得越好。做得越好，杠杆作用越大"。



It’s fascinating to look back at how little of this dynamic was appreciated even two months before Lehman Brothers collapsed and slammed world markets. That’s when the leaders of the Group of Eight (G-8) nations met on the northern Japanese island of Hokkaido. The July 7–9, 2008, summit saw then–Prime Minister Yasuo Fukuda angling to get former U.S. President George W. Bush, Chancellor Angela Merkel, and others to commit to carbon emissions–reduction targets. An important goal for sure, but a focus at odds with the monumental meltdown brewing 7,000 miles away. The G-8’s statement on the world economy was surreally perfunctory given the gravity of global risks:

雷曼兄弟公司倒闭并重创全球市场的两个月前，人们对这一动态还知之甚少。当时，八国集团（G-8）领导人在日本北部的北海道举行会议。在 2008 年 7 月 7 日至 9 日的峰会上，时任首相福田康夫力争让美国前总统布什、德国总理默克尔和其他国家的领导人承诺实现碳减排目标。这无疑是一个重要的目标，但却与 7000 英里之外正在酝酿的巨大灾难格格不入。鉴于全球风险的严重性，八国集团关于世界经济的声明显得异常敷衍：



We are mindful of the interrelated nature of the issues surrounding the world economy. We remain committed to promoting a smooth adjustment of global imbalances through sound macroeconomic management and structural policies.

我们认识到世界经济问题的相互关联性。我们将继续致力于通过健全的宏观经济管理和结构性政策，促进全球失衡的平稳调整。





In retrospect, the setting of the Hokkaido confab, where leaders mused about “sound” economic management, oozed with irony. Japan chose the Windsor Hotel Toya, a resort that opened in 1993 under the name Hotel Apex Toya. Its start was as inauspicious as it gets. The hotel’s main creditor, Hokkaido Takushoku Bank, went bust in November 1997, around the same time Yamaichi’s bankruptcy was panicking markets. Hotel Apex Toya suspended operations in early 1998, and then reopened as the Windsor Hotel Toya in 2002. As fate would have it, that was the same year Prime Minister Koizumi and his economy minister attacked Japan’s bad-loan crisis.

现在回想起来，北海道会议的背景充满了讽刺意味，各国领导人在这里讨论 "健全的 "经济管理。日本选择了洞爷温莎酒店，这是一家于 1993 年开业的度假村，当时名为洞爷 Apex 酒店。它的开业可谓凶多吉少。酒店的主要债权人北海道拓殖银行于 1997 年 11 月破产，与此同时，山一银行的破产也引起了市场的恐慌。洞爷 Apex 酒店于 1998 年初暂停营业，2002 年作为洞爷温莎酒店重新开业。天意弄人，就在这一年，小泉首相和他的经济大臣对日本的不良贷款危机发起了攻击。



And so, as seven visiting world leaders converged in a building that’s as good a symbol of 10 years of squandered growth as any, they had a prime opportunity to debate what lessons Japan held for the G-8 and beyond. At the same time that meeting was convening, a Hong Kong real estate mogul speaking on the other side of Japan, in the western city of Fukuoka, made one of the most prescient predictions of the last five years.

因此，当七位到访的世界领导人汇聚在这座象征着十年增长浪费的建筑时，他们有了一个绝佳的机会来讨论日本为八国集团及其他国家提供了哪些经验教训。就在会议召开的同时，一位香港房地产大亨在日本另一端的西部城市福冈发表演讲，做出了过去五年中最有远见的预测之一。



“What if the lost decade in Japan becomes the global norm?” Ronnie Chan, chairman of Hang Lung Properties Ltd., said at the Asia Innovation Initiative conference on July 8, 2008. “Can you imagine that? Perhaps we should. Perhaps people should get used to slower growth, or no growth.”

"如果日本失去的十年成为全球常态会怎样？恒隆地产有限公司董事长陈启宗在 2008 年 7 月 8 日举行的亚洲创新倡议会议上说。"你能想象吗？也许我们应该这样做。也许人们应该习惯于增长放缓，或者没有增长。



It’s not that Chan, who runs one of the largest real estate development companies in Hong Kong, is a pessimist. Property developers don’t often relish 10 years of lost growth here and 10 years of declining asset values there. Chan saw a rare confluence of economic and demographic trends that bode poorly for a global rebound.

陈先生是香港最大的房地产开发公司之一，他并不是一个悲观主义者。房地产开发商通常不会乐见十年来这里的经济增长乏力和十年来那里的资产价值下降。在陈看来，经济和人口趋势罕见地交织在一起，预示着全球经济反弹的前景不容乐观。



No one should be surprised by the rapid pace of economic expansion after World War II. It began from a low base, following the devastation of economies in Europe and parts of Asia. Next came rapid population growth and a boom in innovation. Then there were new social and institutional paradigms as democracy spread and organizations such as the United Nations and the World Bank offered support.

没有人会对二战后经济的快速扩张感到惊讶。在欧洲和亚洲部分地区经济遭受重创之后，经济扩张的起点很低。接着是人口的快速增长和创新的蓬勃发展。然后是新的社会和制度范式，因为民主得到了传播，联合国和世界银行等组织提供了支持。



But in 2008, just two months before Lehman’s collapse, the picture was looking vastly different to anyone perceptive enough to notice. As everyone tried to stabilize growth, things then were hardly at a low base. Population growth was fueling demand for commodities, driving up inflation, and increasing poverty rates. But at the same time, innovation globally was beginning to slow as investment dried up. And institutions such as the IMF hardly seemed up to the ever-increasing challenges of the day.

但在 2008 年，也就是雷曼倒闭前两个月，对于任何有足够洞察力的人来说，情况都大不相同。当所有人都在努力稳定经济增长时，当时的情况却几乎没有任何起色。人口增长刺激了对商品的需求，推高了通胀，增加了贫困率。但与此同时，由于投资枯竭，全球创新开始放缓。国际货币基金组织等机构似乎难以应对当时日益严峻的挑战。



In the case of Asia, one of these emerging challenges was cracks in the region’s embrace of democracy. It simply wasn’t proving to be the panacea that leaders in the United States and Europe promised. Poverty rates remained stubbornly high in many Asian democracies like Indonesia, the Philippines, and Thailand, and so did corruption. And more and more, the former was a result of the latter. It certainly wasn’t that democracy is bad. Yet there’s something to be said about what Chan calls “premature democratization” in Asia. Elections matter only when nations build strong institutions such as independent courts, ministries, a free press, credible central banks, and ample systems of checks and balances. Their absence means many governments don’t operate as transparently or successfully as expected. The immaturity of Asia’s democracies, at least structurally, did indeed complicate the region’s attempts to avoid the worst of the credit-market crisis. Chan wondered if the type of prosperity during the decade before the 1997 Asian crisis will be more unusual in the future. “Those ten golden years of rapid growth and high returns may well have been an aberration,” Chan said.

就亚洲而言，这些新出现的挑战之一就是该地区对民主的拥护出现了裂痕。事实证明，民主并不是美国和欧洲领导人所承诺的万能药。在印度尼西亚、菲律宾和泰国等许多亚洲民主国家，贫困率依然居高不下，腐败现象也是如此。前者越来越多地是后者的结果。这当然不是说民主不好。然而，陈先生所说的亚洲 "过早民主化 "也是有道理的。只有当国家建立起强大的机构，如独立的法院、部委、自由的新闻媒体、可信的中央银行以及充分的制衡体系时，选举才会变得重要。缺乏这些制度意味着许多政府的运作并不像预期的那样透明或成功。亚洲民主制度的不成熟，至少在结构上，确实使该地区试图避免信贷市场最严重危机的努力变得更加复杂。Chan不禁要问，1997年亚洲危机前十年的繁荣景象是否会在未来变得更加不寻常。"陈说："快速增长和高回报的黄金十年很可能是一种反常现象。



The combination of surging energy and food prices challenged economies with political rifts, such as Thailand and Malaysia. Nor does it bode well for high-poverty ones such as Indonesia and the Philippines, or those trying to compete amid China’s boom—Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan, for example. But the core of the problem was that policy makers were merely putting off the inevitable and treating the symptoms of what ails the global economy. If they weren’t careful, Japan’s experience during the 1990s would become a familiar one. “It’s not a scenario many expect for the West or for Asia,” Chan said. “But I’m not sure it can be ruled out.”

能源和食品价格的飙升给泰国和马来西亚等政治不和的经济体带来了挑战。对于印尼和菲律宾等贫困率较高的国家，或者那些试图在中国经济繁荣中竞争的国家（如韩国、新加坡和台湾）来说，这也不是一个好兆头。但问题的核心在于，政策制定者只是在拖延不可避免的情况，对全球经济的病症头痛医头，脚痛医脚。一不小心，日本在 20 世纪 90 年代的经历就会成为我们熟悉的一幕。"Chan说："这不是许多人期望西方或亚洲会出现的情况。"但我不确定能否排除这种可能性。



How right Chan was became apparent on November 8, 2013, when Summers made his secular-stagnation speech to a group of researchers at IMF headquarters in Washington. There, he silenced a packed room containing some of the world’s best and brightest theorists by stating he wondered if “a set of older ideas that went under the phrase secular stagnation are not profoundly important in understanding Japan’s experience and may not be without relevance to America’s experience.”

2013 年 11 月 8 日，萨默斯在华盛顿国际货币基金组织总部向一群研究人员发表了关于世俗停滞的演讲，陈的观点有多么正确显而易见。他在演讲中表示，"在世俗停滞这个短语下的一系列旧观念，对于理解日本的经验是否具有深远的意义，对于美国的经验是否也不无借鉴意义。"他的这番话让挤满了世界上最优秀、最聪明的理论家的会场鸦雀无声。



The pessimism inherent in these comments surprised the other economists sharing the stage with Summers, including Bernanke, former Bank of Israel Governor Stanley Fischer, Kenneth Rogoff of Harvard University, and Olivier Blanchard, the IMF’s research director. It also generated huge buzz among leading economists, particularly those on the liberal end of the policy-making spectrum, catalyzing immediate and intense debate among Paul Krugman, Jared Bernstein of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, and Miles Kimball of the University of Michigan.

这些评论所蕴含的悲观情绪令与萨默斯同台的其他经济学家感到惊讶，其中包括伯南克、以色列银行前行长斯坦利-菲舍尔、哈佛大学的肯尼斯-罗格夫和国际货币基金组织研究总监奥利维耶-布兰查德。这番话也在顶尖经济学家中引起了巨大反响，尤其是那些处于政策制定自由派一端的经济学家，促使保罗-克鲁格曼、预算与政策优先中心的贾里德-伯恩斯坦和密歇根大学的迈尔斯-金博尔立即展开了激烈的讨论。



“Conventional macroeconomic thinking leaves us in a very serious problem,” Summers said. “The underlying problem may be there forever.” He added: “We may well need in the years ahead to think about how to manage an economy where the zero nominal interest rate is a chronic and systemic inhibitor of economic activity, holding our economies back below their potential.”

"传统的宏观经济思维给我们留下了一个非常严重的问题，"萨默斯说。"根本问题可能永远存在"。他补充说："在未来几年里，我们很可能需要思考如何管理一个零名义利率长期系统性地抑制经济活动、使我们的经济发展低于其潜力的经济体。



Summers, of course, was Obama’s original candidate to run the Fed before the president went with Janet Yellen. He had also served as World Bank chief economist, President Bill Clinton’s Treasury chief, Obama’s National Economic Council director, and president of Harvard, the latter job immortalized by a highly memorable scene in David Fincher’s 2010 film, The Social Network. This wasn’t some fringe figure effectively suggesting that the entire global financial system was turning Japanese.

当然，在总统选择珍妮特-耶伦之前，萨默斯是奥巴马最初的美联储主席候选人。他还曾担任过世界银行首席经济学家、克林顿总统的财政部长、奥巴马的国家经济委员会主任和哈佛大学校长，后一项工作在大卫-芬奇（David Fincher）2010年的电影《社交网络》（The Social Network）中有一个令人难忘的场景。这并不是什么边缘人物在有效地暗示整个全球金融体系正在变成日本式的。



The crux of Summers’s argument was this: The global crisis that nearly bankrupted Wall Street in 2008 was a highly odd one, and not just because of its size and brutality. At the time, many believed monetary policy dating back to the days of the Greenspan Fed had been too lax; there was loads of imprudent lending going on; and households began to feel richer than they really were. Bottom line, the conventional wisdom was that there was too much liquidity, too much credit being extended, and too much paper wealth being created. Yet even with all these imbalances, U.S. economic growth didn’t boom, factories weren’t under any great strain, unemployment didn’t plummet, and inflation was tame. So, oddly, a great financial bubble didn’t create huge excesses in aggregate demand across the economy.

萨默斯的论点核心在于此：2008 年那场几乎让华尔街破产的全球危机非常奇怪，不仅仅是因为它的规模和残酷程度。当时，许多人认为，自格林斯潘美联储时代以来的货币政策过于宽松；存在大量不谨慎的借贷行为；家庭开始感觉自己比实际富裕。总之，传统观点认为，流动性过多，信贷发放过多，创造的纸面财富过多。然而，即使存在所有这些失衡现象，美国的经济增长并没有蓬勃发展，工厂也没有承受任何巨大压力，失业率没有急剧下降，通货膨胀也很温和。因此，奇怪的是，巨大的金融泡沫并没有在整个经济中造成巨大的总需求过剩。





Fast forward to, say, 2010, when the direct effects of the crisis were waning. In a more classical recession environment, economists would expect a great deal of catch-up as the economy’s engines begin humming again and inventories get rebuilt. “So you’d actually kind of expect that once things normalized, you’d get more GDP than you otherwise would have had, not that four years later you’d still be having substantially less than you had before,” Summers said. “So there’s something odd about financial normalization, if that was the whole problem, and then continued slow growth. So what’s an explanation that would fit both of these observations?”

快进到比如说 2010 年，危机的直接影响正在减弱。在传统的经济衰退环境中，经济学家们会预期，随着经济引擎重新开始嗡嗡作响，库存得到重建，会出现大量的追赶现象。"萨默斯说："因此，你实际上会期望，一旦情况正常化，你会获得比原来更多的国内生产总值，而不是四年后你的国内生产总值仍然大大低于原来的水平。萨默斯说："因此，如果金融正常化是整个问题的症结所在，那么持续缓慢的增长就有些奇怪了。那么，有什么解释能同时符合这两个观察结果呢？



Suppose that the short-term real interest rate that was consistent with full employment had fallen to negative 2 or negative 3 percent sometime in the middle of the last decade. Then what would happen? That even with artificial stimulus to demand coming from all this financial imprudence, you wouldn’t see any excess demand, and even with a relative resumption of credit—normal credit conditions, you’d have a lot of difficulty getting back to full employment. Yes, it has been demonstrated absolutely conclusively, that panics are terrible and that monetary policy can contain them when the interest rate is zero. It has been demonstrated less conclusively but presumptively that when short-term interest rates are zero, monetary policy can affect a constellation of other asset prices in ways that support demand even when the short-term interest rate can’t be lowered. Just how large that impact is on demand is less clear, but it is there. But imagine a situation where natural and equilibrium interest rates have fallen significantly below zero.

假设符合充分就业的短期实际利率在过去十年中期的某个时候下降到负 2% 或负 3%，那么会发生什么情况呢？那么会发生什么呢？即使这些不谨慎的金融行为人为地刺激了需求，你也不会看到任何过剩的需求，即使信贷相对恢复--正常的信贷条件，你也很难回到充分就业的状态。是的，事实已经绝对确凿地证明，恐慌是可怕的，而当利率为零时，货币政策可以遏制恐慌。事实证明，当短期利率为零时，即使短期利率无法降低，货币政策也能以支持需求的方式影响一系列其他资产价格，这一点虽然不那么确凿，但也可以推测。至于这种影响对需求有多大，目前还不太清楚，但它确实存在。但试想一下，当自然利率和均衡利率大幅降至零以下时，货币政策会对其他资产价格产生怎样的影响？





The problem, in Summers’s view is that most of what would be done under the auspices of preventing another crisis could actually be counterproductive. After five years of dealing with the fallout from 2008 with few indications that things are returning to normal, it’s high time to think about the remedies policy makers are applying. That includes thinking that easier monetary and fiscal policies are always and everywhere the answer and looking to other levers to manage lending, borrowing, and the level of asset prices.

萨默斯认为，问题在于以防止危机再次发生为名所做的大部分工作实际上可能适得其反。在应对2008年危机的后果五年之后，几乎没有迹象表明情况正在恢复正常，现在是时候对决策者采取的补救措施进行反思了。这包括思考更宽松的货币和财政政策是否总能解决问题，并寻求其他杠杆来管理借贷和资产价格水平。



“So, my lesson from this crisis—and my overarching lesson, which I have to say, I think the world has underinternalized—is that it is not over until it is over, and that is surely not right now and cannot be judged relative to the extent of financial panic, and that we may well need in the years ahead to think about how we manage an economy in which the zero nominal interest rate is a chronic and systemic inhibitor of economic activities, holding our economies back below their potential,” Summers said.

"萨默斯说："因此，我从这场危机中汲取的教训--我必须说，我认为全世界都没有充分认识到这一点--就是，在危机结束之前，一切都还没有结束，现在肯定还不是时候，而且也不能根据金融恐慌的程度来判断，在未来几年里，我们很可能需要思考如何管理一个经济，在这个经济中，名义零利率是经济活动的长期和系统性抑制因素，使我们的经济发展低于其潜力。



Financial Times columnist Martin Wolf (November 19, 2013) summed it up like this:

金融时报》专栏作家马丁-沃尔夫（Martin Wolf，2013 年 11 月 19 日）这样总结道：



Merely restoring a degree of health to the financial system or reducing the overhang of excessive pre-crisis debt is, then, unlikely to deliver a full recovery. The reason is that the crisis followed financial excesses, which themselves masked or, as I have argued, were even a response to pre-existing structural weaknesses.

因此，仅仅使金融体系恢复一定程度的健康或减少危机前过多的债务是不可能实现全面复苏的。原因在于，危机是在金融过度之后发生的，而金融过度本身掩盖了结构性缺陷，或者正如我所说，甚至是对结构性缺陷的回应。





Here, as Summers ponders how disorienting the world of economic policy making has become in recent years, he could just as easily be talking about Japan as the United States. Japan has been living with zero rates for so long that they seem par for the course. Under the surface, interest rate relationships mean little, not when the underlying assets on which they are based are gussied up on monetary stimulants. Bank, corporate, and government balance sheets get murkier and it gets hard to pinpoint where a central bank’s holdings begin and end. Corporate malfeasance is easier to disguise.

在萨默斯思考近年来世界经济政策制定变得多么令人迷失方向时，他可以轻松地谈论日本，也可以轻松地谈论美国。日本已经在零利率的环境中生活了如此之久，以至于零利率似乎是理所当然的。从表面上看，利率关系并无多大意义，当作为利率关系基础的资产在货币刺激剂的熏陶下变得光鲜亮丽时更是如此。银行、企业和政府的资产负债表变得越来越模糊，很难确定中央银行持有资产的起点和终点。企业的渎职行为更容易掩饰。



Prominent economists like Yale University’s Robert Shiller also warn that the United States risks a prolonged, Japan-style slump if it doesn’t get more creative about its crisis response. As the debris of the global crisis was still settling in 2009, Shiller cowrote a timely book with George Akerlof, a Nobel Prize–winning economist, titled Animal Spirits, a phrase borrowed from Keynes’s 1936 work. Their central thesis was that confidence and human behavior play an underappreciated role in driving the American economy and global capital markets. Yet, as Shiller notes, in a world of zero and skewed measures of risk, how can one tell if such confidence is real or delusional, or manufactured from on high, for that matter? There are ways in which the 1980s success of Japan Inc. was more fantasy than reality. Here again, Yamaichi serves as a microcosm for how and why things went so wrong, so quickly.

耶鲁大学的罗伯特-席勒（Robert Shiller）等著名经济学家也警告说，如果美国在应对危机方面不采取更具创造性的措施，就有可能陷入日本式的长期低迷。2009 年，当全球危机的余波还未平息时，席勒与诺贝尔经济学奖得主乔治-阿克洛夫（George Akerlof）合作撰写了一本名为《动物精神》（Animal Spirits）的书。他们的中心论点是，信心和人类行为在推动美国经济和全球资本市场方面发挥着被低估的作用。然而，正如席勒所指出的，在一个零风险和偏斜风险度量的世界里，人们如何分辨这种信心是真实的还是妄想的，或者是高高在上制造出来的？在某些方面，20 世纪 80 年代日本公司的成功与其说是现实，不如说是幻想。在这里，山一公司再次成为一个缩影，说明了事情是如何以及为什么会如此迅速地出错。



By the mid-1980s, overconfidence fused with the BOJ’s easy-money policies and raised stock and real-estate speculation to not only an art form but a genuine mania as assets surged in value to unimaginable levels. The Nikkei alone tripled in value between 1985 and 1989. But even more than optimism about Japan’s economic outlook, the boom was fueled by the underlying idiosyncrasies and mechanics of Japan Inc. One was the nation’s keiretsu, or networks of huge businesses involving a web of cross-shareholdings. The practice boosted share prices throughout the 1980s, and contributed to the ballooning wealth of corporations and the overseas perception that Japan Inc. had found a financial Holy Grail of sorts.

到 20 世纪 80 年代中期，过度自信与日本央行的宽松货币政策相融合，使股票和房地产投机不仅成为一种艺术形式，而且成为一种真正的狂热，资产价值飙升到难以想象的水平。1985 年至 1989 年间，仅日经指数的价值就增长了两倍。但与对日本经济前景的乐观情绪相比，日本公司的内在特质和机制更助长了这股热潮。其一是日本的keiretsu，即涉及交叉持股网络的巨型企业网络。在整个 20 世纪 80 年代，这种做法推高了股价，使企业财富不断膨胀，也让海外认为日本公司找到了金融圣杯。



At the root of this excess was a practice known as zaitech, or financial engineering. Word derivations can offer crucial clues about the sustainability of any business strategy, and zaitech was no exception. It literally blends the Japanese word for corporate dealings, zaimu, with technology and its effect was no less damaging than the financial innovation that would get Wall Street in so much trouble 20 years later. Powered by ultralow borrowing costs and labyrinthine accounting norms, firms would speculate in asset prices across sectors, in all corners of Japan. Those investments paid off as the underlying assets rose, boosting corporate profits and giving executives even more incentive to further leverage balance sheets. This dynamic would come back to haunt Japan as recently as 2011, when Olympus Corp. blew up. Among the regulatory weaknesses it exposed was a corporate governance system still geared toward hiding losses. Olympus was a prime example of untold billions of yen poured into speculative zaitech trades of the 1980s and 1990s, which are still turning sour.

这种过剩的根源是一种被称为 zaitech 或金融工程的做法。词汇的衍生可以为任何商业战略的可持续性提供重要线索，ZAITECH 也不例外。从字面上看，"zaitech "将日语中企业交易的 "zaimu "与技术相结合，其破坏性不亚于 20 年后让华尔街陷入困境的金融创新。在超低借贷成本和迷宫般的会计规范的推动下，企业在日本的各个角落对各行各业的资产价格进行投机。随着相关资产的上涨，这些投资也得到了回报，从而提高了企业利润，并为高管们进一步利用资产负债表提供了更大的动力。就在 2011 年，奥林巴斯公司（Olympus Corp.该事件暴露出的监管缺陷之一，就是公司治理体系仍然以隐瞒亏损为导向。奥林巴斯是一个典型的例子，20 世纪 80 年代和 90 年代，数以十亿计的日元被投入到投机性的财阀交易中，而这些交易至今仍在变坏。



The same went for the practice of tobashi, another way to hide investments going bad. Outlawed in 2000, these schemes provide an indirect link between Yamaichi’s drama in 1997 and Olympus’s 14 years later. Loosely translated, tobashi means “flying.” In its most common form, a client’s losses are shifted from account to account. A customer or business partner might be asked to buy the stocks, bonds, or assets on which another customer had taken a loss, at above-market price. Next, the brokerage or company would promise to buy back those securities or assets from the new owner at a profit after they had appreciated in price. At that point, the flying investment would have flown from client to client—everyone left happy and no one the wiser.

tobashi 也是如此，它是另一种掩盖投资亏损的方法。这些骗局在 2000 年被取缔，它们间接地将 1997 年山一的戏剧和 14 年后奥林帕斯的戏剧联系在一起。Tobashi的意思是 "飞行"。最常见的形式是将客户的损失从一个账户转移到另一个账户。客户或业务伙伴可能会被要求以高于市场的价格购买另一位客户亏损的股票、债券或资产。接下来，经纪公司或公司会承诺在这些证券或资产升值后，以盈利的价格从新的所有者手中买回这些证券或资产。至此，飞行投资就从客户手中飞到了客户手中--大家皆大欢喜，谁也不知道。



Yet it’s a bull-market strategy. It worked brilliantly in the 1980s, when stocks and asset values surged to the point where the grounds surrounding Tokyo’s Imperial Palace—all of 1.32 square miles—were believed to be worth more than the entire state of California. But in the 1990s, as markets crashed, Japan Inc. had to eat its losses. As those losses became harder to disguise and manage, executives, including those at Yamaichi, had no choice but to file for bankruptcy.

然而，这是一种牛市策略。在 20 世纪 80 年代，这一策略发挥了巨大作用，当时股票和资产价值飙升，东京皇宫周围 1.32 平方英里的土地据信比整个加利福尼亚州还值钱。但在 20 世纪 90 年代，随着市场崩溃，日本公司不得不自认损失。随着这些损失越来越难以掩饰和管理，包括山一公司在内的高管们别无选择，只能申请破产。



Still, as the Olympus saga proved, the legacy of those days remains. Japan has been medicating its economy for so long with so many different stimulus treatments that it’s unrecognizable from the late 1970s, just as the bubble years were beginning. It’s given Japan a distinctive Alice in Wonderland quality. Rather than getting bogged down in the inconvenient realities of supply, demand, and globalization, Tokyo preferred to live in a “through-the-looking-glass” world of fantasy and illusion sustained by financial socialism. After tumbling down the rabbit hole, investors are on their own to make heads or tails of Tokyo’s policies. It’s economics in its most surreal form.

然而，正如奥林巴斯事件所证明的那样，那些日子遗留下来的问题依然存在。长期以来，日本一直在用各种不同的刺激措施来治疗其经济，以至于与 20 世纪 70 年代末泡沫经济刚刚开始的时候相比，已经面目全非。这给日本带来了一种爱丽丝梦游仙境的独特气质。东京宁愿生活在一个由金融社会主义支撑的 "透过望远镜 "的幻想和虚幻世界中，也不愿陷入供应、需求和全球化等不便面对的现实。在跌入兔子洞后，投资者只能靠自己来理解东京的政策。这是最超现实的经济学。



Of course, America has gotten plenty creative with its finances, with scandals from Enron Corp. to WorldCom Inc. to Ponzi-schemer Bernard Madoff. It is true of Europe, too, from the book-cookers at Parmalat SpA to Greek government officials who masked the extent of the nation’s budget deficit with the help of Goldman Sachs. Yet at the root of it all, at the core of each and every example of corporate and public-debt malfeasance over the last decade has been Japan-like monetary excesses.

当然，从安然公司（Enron Corp）到世通公司（WorldCom Inc.欧洲也是如此，从帕玛拉特公司（Parmalat SpA）的账簿 "煮熟的鸭子"，到希腊政府官员在高盛集团（Goldman Sachs）的帮助下掩盖国家预算赤字的程度。然而，这一切的根源，过去十年来每一个企业和公共债务渎职案例的核心，都是日本式的货币超发。



Take the “Greenspan put” that fundamentally altered the relationship between the Fed, hedge funds, and, in many ways, the global financial system. On December 5, 1996, then-Chairman Alan Greenspan (1987–2006) tiptoed up to a delicate question, and used Japan’s bubbles as a lens through which to view it: “How do we know when irrational exuberance has unduly escalated asset values, which then become subject to unexpected and prolonged contractions as they have in Japan over the past decade?” His meaning was unmistakable, as the question was raised amidst America’s dot-com bubble of the 1990s and speculation that the so-called New Economy had made business cycles and recessions extinct.

格林斯潘认沽 "从根本上改变了美联储、对冲基金以及全球金融体系之间的关系。1996 年 12 月 5 日，时任美联储主席艾伦-格林斯潘（1987-2006 年）蹑手蹑脚地提出了一个微妙的问题，并将日本的泡沫作为观察问题的一个视角："我们如何知道什么时候非理性繁荣会使资产价值过度膨胀，然后像日本过去十年那样出现意外的长期收缩？他的意思很明确，因为这个问题是在 20 世纪 90 年代美国的网络泡沫和所谓的新经济已使商业周期和衰退绝迹的猜测中提出的。



Stocks nosedived and lawmakers cried foul, saying that the Fed’s job was to maintain price stability, not talk down markets. On December 12, Greenspan was summoned to Capitol Hill for a 50-minute dressing-down by then–Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott. After that, Greenspan uttered nary a public word about froth in U.S. shares as investors clamored to pour millions into any company that slapped a “.com” on the end of its name and the Nasdaq Composite Index headed to an irrational 5132-point level.

股市暴跌，议员们大喊冤枉，称美联储的职责是维持物价稳定，而不是对市场说三道四。12 月 12 日，格林斯潘被当时的参议院多数党领袖特伦特-洛特（Trent Lott）传唤到国会山，接受了长达 50 分钟的训斥。此后，格林斯潘对美国股市的泡沫只字不提，因为投资者争先恐后地将数百万资金投入到任何一家在公司名称后面冠以".com "的公司，纳斯达克综合指数达到了非理性的 5132 点水平。



A “put option” insures an investor against a market falling below a certain level, and Greenspan personified it. He pumped liquidity into markets when Mexico fell into crisis in 1994 and Asia followed in 1997 and again in 1998 when the ironically named Greenwich, Connecticut–based hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management imploded. Greenspan showered markets with liquidity ahead of possible “Y2K” computer disruptions as 1999 ticked into 2000 and after the 9/11 terrorist attacks on New York and Washington in September 2001. Yet it was in the mid-2000s, just before Bernanke took over in 2006, that the Fed’s largess really began distorting markets. All that liquidity fueled the leverage that almost toppled Wall Street.

看跌期权 "为投资者提供市场跌破某一水平的保险，而格林斯潘就是这种期权的化身。1994 年墨西哥陷入危机，1997 年亚洲紧随其后，1998 年总部位于康涅狄格州格林威治的对冲基金 "长期资本管理公司"（Long-Term Capital Management）发生内爆，格林斯潘为市场注入了流动性。1999 年进入 2000 年时，"千年虫 "计算机可能出现故障，2001 年 9 月纽约和华盛顿遭遇 911 恐怖袭击，格林斯潘在此之前向市场注入了流动性。然而，在 2000 年代中期，也就是伯南克于 2006 年接任之前，美联储的慷慨才真正开始扭曲市场。所有的流动性助长了杠杆作用，几乎推翻了华尔街。



This period accelerated the internationalization of the Fed. The U.S. central bank has 12 districts across the United States and conducts its policies based on supply and demand strains around the nation. But the last 15 years have seen the creation of de facto spheres of Fed influence around the globe. It isn’t far-fetched to think of Latin America as the thirteenth district, Southeast Asia the fourteenth, Russia the fifteenth, China the sixteenth, and so on. From Seoul to Santiago, investors often care more about what happens in Washington than they do about actions taken by local monetary authorities, hence global concern over a clumsy exit from the Fed’s quantitative easing experiment.

这一时期加速了美联储的国际化进程。美国中央银行在全美设有 12 个地区，并根据各地的供求紧张状况制定政策。但在过去的 15 年中，美联储在全球各地形成了事实上的影响范围。将拉丁美洲视为第十三个地区、将东南亚视为第十四个地区、将俄罗斯视为第十五个地区、将中国视为第十六个地区等等，并不牵强。从首尔到圣地亚哥，投资者往往更关心华盛顿发生的事情，而不是当地货币当局采取的行动，因此全球都对美联储退出量化宽松实验的笨拙做法表示担忧。



Blame it on the ghosts of the mid-1990s. Before markets heard of the “Greenspan put” there was Greenspan’s “Great Bond Market Massacre of 1994.” Under his leadership, the Fed helped precipitate Asia’s 1997 crisis when it doubled benchmark lending rates over 12 months, causing, according to Fortune, more than $600 billion in losses on U.S. Treasuries. By the time Greenspan was done, chaos in credit markets drove Orange County, California, into bankruptcy; sank Kidder Peabody & Co.; pushed Mexico into crisis; and strained Asia’s currency pegs as the dollar began a powerful rally that forced the region to devalue a few years later.

这要归咎于 20 世纪 90 年代中期的幽灵。在市场听到 "格林斯潘认沽 "之前，就有格林斯潘的 "1994 年债券市场大屠杀"。据《财富》杂志报道，在他的领导下，美联储在 12 个月内将基准贷款利率提高了一倍，导致美国国债损失超过 6000 亿美元，从而引发了 1997 年的亚洲危机。到格林斯潘卸任时，信贷市场的混乱导致加利福尼亚州奥兰治县破产；基德尔-皮博迪公司（Kidder Peabody & Co.）沉没；墨西哥陷入危机；由于美元开始强劲反弹，亚洲货币挂钩关系紧张，几年后迫使该地区货币贬值。



As the Bernanke Fed mulls how to unwind its unprecedented $3.3 trillion balance sheet, Asians worry anew about dollar exposure. There are three big risks as Bernanke & Co. withdraw liquidity: higher borrowing costs, huge swings in financial markets, and lower economic growth. And that’s if the Fed restores normalcy to rates in a gradual, orderly, and transparent way. If it’s handled clumsily, as it was in 1994, then 2014 could be a disastrous year for the world’s most dynamic region.

在伯南克联储考虑如何解除其史无前例的 3.3 万亿美元资产负债表之际，亚洲人再次担心美元风险。伯南克等人撤出流动性有三大风险：借贷成本上升、金融市场大幅波动和经济增长放缓。这还是在美联储以渐进、有序和透明的方式恢复利率正常化的情况下。如果像 1994 年那样笨拙地处理，那么 2014 年对于世界上最具活力的地区来说可能是灾难性的一年。



The stakes of any Fed misstep are now appreciably higher. Sovereign-debt levels have more than quadrupled, to more than $23 trillion since 1994. A scenario in which too much debt chases too few buyers or decent investments would amplify market turmoil. Also, 20 years ago the world economy was arguably a much healthier place. Back then, the wobbly euro didn’t exist, China’s economy hardly mattered, and the high-frequency trading now dominating the world’s bourses was found more in science fiction novels than Wall Street’s reality. Asia now holds trillions of dollars of currency reserves, many in U.S. currency.

现在，美联储任何失误的风险都明显更高。自 1994 年以来，主权债务水平翻了两番多，达到 23 万亿美元以上。如果过多的债务追逐过少的买家或体面的投资，将会加剧市场动荡。此外，20 年前的世界经济可以说要健康得多。那时，摇摇欲坠的欧元还不存在，中国的经济几乎无足轻重，现在主导全球股市的高频交易更多出现在科幻小说中，而不是华尔街的现实中。亚洲现在拥有数万亿美元的货币储备，其中许多是美元。



Yet when it comes to financial socialism, to manipulating asset markets to mask economic problems, the Fed and U.S. Treasury have nothing on the BOJ and Ministry of Finance. Remember that from 1955 until now, Japan has for the most part been a one-party state. At its center is the symbiotic relationship between government, the bureaucracy, and big business—dubbed Japan’s iron triangle. Under this system, the bureaucracy had great sway over policy priorities, legislation, budgets, and, ultimately, national interests. Cabinet members would then merely rubber-stamp the ideas and initiatives of unelected bureaucrats of unknown agency and scant accountability.

然而，说到金融社会主义，说到操纵资产市场来掩盖经济问题，美联储和美国财政部在日本央行和大藏省面前毫无招架之力。请记住，从 1955 年至今，日本大部分时间都是一党制国家。其核心是政府、官僚机构和大企业之间的共生关系，被称为日本的铁三角。在这种体制下，官僚机构对政策的优先次序、立法、预算以及最终的国家利益拥有极大的影响力。内阁成员只是对机构不明、责任不明的非民选官僚的想法和倡议进行橡皮图章式的批准。



“This triumvirate of interest has not always agreed on policy issues, but has found enough common ground to maintain a level of cooperation that ensured extended political hegemony,” Temple University’s Jeff Kingston pointed out in his 2011 book, Contemporary Japan. “Political scientists attribute Japan’s persistent structural corruption to this triangle of interests and the means they have adopted to sustain their power.”

"坦普尔大学的杰夫-金斯顿（Jeff Kingston）在 2011 年出版的《当代日本》一书中指出："这个利益三方并非总是在政策问题上达成一致，但却找到了足够的共同点来维持一定程度的合作，从而确保扩大政治霸权。"政治学家将日本持续存在的结构性腐败归因于这一利益三角以及他们为维持权力而采取的手段。





Japan’s enduring triumvirate, of course, has nothing on China’s Communist Party, which doesn’t stand for elections. Yet as China employs a development model that in many ways mirrors Japan’s, Beijing should heed lessons from Tokyo. From New York to Singapore, the overwhelming view is that China can grow 7 percent to 8 percent indefinitely, its potential is boundless, and it’s run by omnipotent geniuses who can’t lose. China is today’s New Economy and anyone who disagrees just doesn’t get it. For that to be true, though, China would have to beat the system, so to speak. No emerging nation has avoided a crisis that sent growth reeling and markets plunging—not one.

当然，日本三足鼎立的局面与中国共产党相比毫不逊色，因为中国共产党不参加选举。然而，由于中国采用的发展模式在许多方面都与日本如出一辙，因此北京应该吸取东京的教训。从纽约到新加坡，绝大多数人都认为中国可以无限增长 7% 到 8%，潜力无穷，而且中国由无所不能的天才掌管，不会输。中国是当今的新经济，任何持反对意见的人都是不了解这一点。不过，要做到这一点，中国就必须击败整个体系。没有一个新兴国家避免过经济增长下滑和市场暴跌的危机，没有一个。



Can China avoid Japanization? For Beijing, the answer is bold and creative action on the part of President Xi Jinping and Premier Li Keqiang, of the kind Japanese officialdom has seldom displayed. Think of their 10-year term that began in March 2013 as China’s make-or-break period to dodge a major debt crisis.

中国能否避免日本化？对中国政府来说，答案就是习近平主席和李克强总理采取大胆而富有创造性的行动，这是日本官方很少表现出来的。2013年3月开始的10年任期是中国避免重大债务危机的决胜期。



But if imitation really is the greatest form of flattery, Abe should be thrilled the Chinese are copying his Abenomics strategy to excite investors. The rest of the world shouldn’t be. China isn’t cribbing the Japanese prime minister’s actual blueprint, but his formula of spin and hype that has convinced the world that something that doesn’t yet exist is real. The key to a great ad campaign is attracting customers and keeping them, something Abe has done with a brilliance that could teach the Edelman public-relations firm a thing or two.

但是，如果模仿真的是最大的奉承，那么安倍晋三应该为中国复制他的安倍经济学战略来刺激投资者而感到高兴。而世界其他国家则不应如此。中国并没有照搬日本首相的实际蓝图，而是照搬了他的自旋和炒作公式，让世界相信一些尚不存在的东西是真实的。一场出色广告活动的关键在于吸引客户并留住客户，而安倍晋三在这方面的出色表现值得爱德曼公共关系公司学习。



Abe’s campaign has gone as follows. Introduce a three-part revival plan. Then, roll out the first two segments, the easy ones, right away with great fanfare and to spectacular effect. Abe’s huge monetary and fiscal stimulus did just that, driving equities higher and foreign investors wild. Finally, use that euphoria as a smoke screen to delay the third part, the really hard one that involves controversial steps to deregulate the economy and take on a bewildering number of vested interests.

安倍的竞选活动如下。推出一个由三部分组成的复兴计划。然后，立即大张旗鼓地推出前两个部分，也就是容易的部分，并取得惊人的效果。安倍晋三的巨额货币和财政刺激政策就起到了这样的作用，推动股市走高，让外国投资者疯狂。最后，利用这种兴奋作为烟雾弹，推迟第三部分，也就是真正困难的部分，这部分涉及放松经济管制的争议性措施，并涉及令人困惑的既得利益。



Eyeing the Nikkei 225 stock average’s 57 percent surge in 2013, it’s easy to forget that Abe hasn’t implemented a single structural change. Has he lowered any trade barriers? No. Loosened labor markets? Nope. Increased female labor participation? Hardly. Has he encouraged private investment, improved corporate governance, liberalized energy markets, or tweaked taxes to empower entrepreneurship? Sadly not. Yet investment banks and the news media treat Abenomics as if it’s already generating the self-reinforcing recovery that’s eluded Japan for decades. Li, the Chinese premier, is facing the most daunting economic reform challenge since the days of Deng Xiaoping. Li must reduce the role of state-owned enterprises, modernize the financial and fiscal systems, overhaul land and household registration rules, reduce the economy’s reliance on exports, and cap pollution so that China’s 1.3 billion people don’t choke on their economic success. Getting any of these reforms past corrupt Communist Party bigwigs profiting from the status quo requires a level of political will that neither Li nor President Xi has so far displayed.

2013 年，日经 225 日经平均指数飙升了 57%，但人们很容易忘记，安倍晋三并没有实施任何结构性改革。他降低了贸易壁垒吗？没有。没有。提高女性劳动参与率了吗？几乎没有。他鼓励过私人投资，改善过公司治理，开放过能源市场，或者调整过税收以增强创业能力吗？遗憾的是，没有。然而，投资银行和新闻媒体却把安倍经济学当做已经实现了日本几十年来一直未能实现的自我强化的经济复苏。中国总理李克强正面临着自邓小平时代以来最严峻的经济改革挑战。李克强必须降低国有企业的作用，实现金融和财政体系的现代化，彻底改革土地和户籍制度，减少经济对出口的依赖，并限制污染，从而使中国 13 亿人口不会因经济成功而窒息。要让这些改革顺利通过腐败的共产党大佬们，让他们从现状中获利，需要一定的政治意愿，而李克强和习主席迄今为止都没有表现出这样的政治意愿。



And so, Li and Xi are pulling an Abe. Both talk about their “comprehensive reforms” ad nauseam, so much so that economists and investors have come to believe something is actually going on. Just like Abenomics, China’s new leaders bamboozled the masses with a pair of grand gestures—neither of which worked as intended—to deflect attention from the third. The first was a credit clampdown in June; the second was the proclamation that a brake was being applied to growth in the name of preventing the economy from overheating.

因此，李克强和习近平都在模仿安倍晋三。两人都在不厌其烦地谈论他们的 "全面改革"，以至于经济学家和投资者都开始相信他们真的在做什么。就像安倍经济学一样，中国的新领导人用两个大手笔欺骗大众--这两个大手笔都没有起到预期的作用--以转移对第三个大手笔的关注。第一个是 6 月份的信贷紧缩；第二个是宣布以防止经济过热为名，对经济增长采取制动措施。



Closing the credit spigot traumatized markets so much that officials backed off. There’s loads of credit being extended around the nation today that will go bad when China experiences trouble, as every industrializing nation invariably does. The broadest measure of money supply, or M2, has exceeded the official goal of 13 percent every month this year, rising at a 14.2 percent rate in September—some clampdown. China’s growth, meanwhile, isn’t slowing to 7 percent from the average 10.5 percent average pace of the last 10 years by design. The economic model that once worked so brilliantly has run out of steam. China isn’t promoting slower growth—it’s stuck with it.

关闭信贷闸门给市场造成了巨大创伤，以至于官员们打了退堂鼓。如今，全国各地都在发放大量信贷，一旦中国出现问题，这些信贷就会贬值，每个工业化国家都会遇到这种情况。今年以来，最广泛的货币供应量（M2）每月都超过了官方设定的 13% 的目标，9 月份的增幅更是达到了 14.2%--这无疑是一种打压。与此同时，中国经济增长速度从过去 10 年的平均 10.5% 放缓至 7%，并非有意为之。曾经非常成功的经济模式已经黔驴技穷。中国不是在推动增长放缓，而是在坚持增长放缓。



Yet China has managed to conflate these two dynamics with the economic upgrades that are key to the nation’s stability. Worse, Li and Xi are still maddeningly vague about what they have planned for their economy. Consider this comment by Xi in October, carried by the official Xinhua News Agency: “We must properly handle the relations between reform, development, and stability, and with greater political courage and wisdom, further open our minds, unleash and develop social productivity, and enhance the creative forces of the society.”

然而，中国却将这两种动力与对国家稳定至关重要的经济升级混为一谈。更糟糕的是，李克强和习近平对他们的经济计划仍然含糊其辞，令人抓狂。请看官方新华社 10 月份刊登的习近平的评论："我们要正确处理改革发展稳定关系，以更大的政治勇气和智慧，进一步解放思想，释放和发展社会生产力，增强全社会创造活力。



What does that even mean? It almost seems as if Xi was playing his own game of Buzzword Bingo, ticking off code-words that tested well with some focus group to provide the illusion that bold and smart changes are afoot. Buzzwords and phrases such as reform and stability and develop social productivity sound good to hopeful executives and investors, but seem meant to avoid specificity.

这到底是什么意思？这几乎就像是习近平在玩他自己的 "流行语宾果 "游戏，在一些焦点小组中测试良好的代码词上打勾，以制造一种正在进行大胆而明智的变革的假象。改革稳定、发展社会生产力等流行语和短语对满怀希望的高管和投资者来说听起来不错，但似乎是为了避免具体化。



Pardon me if I don’t get excited about Politburo member Yu Zhengsheng pledging that “unprecedented” change will emerge from China’s current leadership. Forgive me if I don’t buy into what’s increasingly being called “Likonomics,” which is more of a marketing slogan than a credible plan. Game-changing reforms take years to implement in any economy, never mind one as large and imbalanced as China’s. Yet Li and Xi, just like Abe, are spending almost all their time talking when they need to be engineering major changes. No industrializing economy has ever avoided a crash of some kind, and neither will China. The more Beijing puts empty sloganeering ahead of retooling its economy, the more it tries to delay its day of reckoning, the bigger it will be. And all the spin in the world can’t save China from that reality.

政治局委员俞正声承诺，中国现任领导层将出现 "史无前例 "的变革，但请原谅我对此并不兴奋。如果我不相信越来越多的所谓 "李克强经济学"，请原谅我。在任何经济体中，改变游戏规则的改革都需要数年时间才能实施，更不用说像中国这样庞大且失衡的经济体了。然而，李克强和习近平与安倍晋三一样，在需要进行重大变革的时候，却几乎把所有时间都花在了空谈上。没有一个工业化经济体能避免某种形式的崩溃，中国也不会。中国政府越是把空洞的口号放在经济改革之前，越是试图推迟清算日，清算日就会越大。世界上所有的花言巧语都无法将中国从这一现实中拯救出来。



China is not impossibly indebted, considering it has $3.7 trillion in currency reserves. JPMorgan reckons its debt-to-gross-domestic-product ratio rose to 187 percent in 2012 from 105 percent in 2000, compared with Japan’s increase to 176 percent in 1990 from 127 percent in 1980. Japan’s has exploded since then and could approach two-and-a-half times annual output. That would mark a jump of 10 percent from 2012 alone in a fast-aging nation that’s losing global competitiveness.

考虑到中国拥有 3.7 万亿美元的货币储备，中国并非负债累累。摩根大通认为，中国的债务与国内生产总值的比率从2000年的105%上升到2012年的187%，而日本则从1980年的127%上升到1990年的176%。自那时起，日本的债务占国内生产总值的比例急剧上升，可能接近年产值的 2.5 倍。这标志着这个正在迅速老化并逐渐丧失全球竞争力的国家仅在 2012 年就跃升了 10%。



But China, also aging, couldn’t withstand a similar jump; it must rein things in now. Japan became rich before its society became old. It had decades to build a social contract between the public and private sectors, nurture a stable of innovative companies, and open the financial system. That legwork enabled Japan to muddle along for two decades without a huge debt meltdown or social unrest.

但同样老龄化的中国经不起类似的跳跃，现在必须控制局面。日本在社会老龄化之前就已经富裕起来。它花了几十年的时间在公共和私营部门之间建立社会契约，培育稳定的创新型企业，并开放金融体系。这些工作使日本得以浑浑噩噩地走过二十年，没有出现巨额债务崩溃或社会动荡。



Japan’s is a tale of hubris and missed opportunities. Rather than quickly scrapping a model based on overinvestment, exports, and excessive debt, Tokyo delayed change at all costs by relying on current-account surpluses, huge budget deficits, and asset bubbles. In many ways, it still does. Does this sound familiar?

日本是一个狂妄自大、错失良机的故事。东京没有迅速废除基于过度投资、出口和过度债务的模式，而是不惜一切代价依靠经常账户盈余、巨额预算赤字和资产泡沫来拖延变革。在许多方面，东京现在仍然如此。这听起来耳熟吗？



“China has so far followed in the footsteps of Japan,” Reading and Choyleva argue.

"雷丁和乔伊列娃认为，"迄今为止，中国一直在步日本的后尘。



But its economy is not yet over-indebted. So there is time for China to avoid Japan’s mistakes if it changes course. The lesson from Japan’s experience in the 1970s and 1980s is that change drives change and liberalization becomes unavoidable. But unless policy is aimed at fundamental structural reform, the temporary solutions of running current account surpluses, budget deficits, and spawning bubbles will eventually run out of steam and cause growth to stall. But China is far from having twenty more years to be blowing up bubbles.

但中国经济尚未过度负债。因此，如果中国改变方向，就有时间避免重蹈日本的覆辙。日本在 20 世纪 70 年代和 80 年代的经验教训是，变革推动变革，自由化不可避免。但是，除非政策以根本性的结构改革为目标，否则经常账户盈余、预算赤字和催生泡沫等临时性解决方案终将耗尽能量，导致经济增长停滞。但中国还远远没有二十年的时间来吹泡泡。





There are troubling signs that Beijing thinks it has plenty of time to deal with the problem. For every pledge to cut excess production capacity, audit government borrowings, and tolerate sub-8-percent growth, there are two others assuring markets that growth won’t be allowed to slow too much.

一些令人担忧的迹象表明，中国政府认为自己有足够的时间来解决这个问题。每当中国政府承诺削减过剩产能、审核政府借贷、容忍低于 8% 的经济增长时，就会有另外两个政府向市场保证不会让经济增长放缓太多。



One problem is that of politics over economics. Around China, dozens of local leaders are vying to put their cities on the global map and become the toast of the Communist Party. That means more than delivering rapid GDP. It also means building huge skyscrapers, international airports, six-lane highways, five-star hotel chains, sports stadiums, universities, giant cultural centers, and swanky shopping arcades punctuated with Prada and Hermes shops—all financed with fresh debt. If several of these metropolises go bust, Detroit’s $18 billion bankruptcy will look like small change by comparison.

其中一个问题是政治重于经济。在中国各地，数十位地方领导人都在争相将自己的城市推向全球，成为共产党的宠儿。这不仅仅意味着快速实现 GDP。这还意味着要建造巨大的摩天大楼、国际机场、六车道高速公路、五星级连锁酒店、体育场馆、大学、巨型文化中心，以及遍布普拉达和爱马仕专卖店的豪华购物街--所有这些都需要新的债务融资。如果其中几个大都市破产，底特律 180 亿美元的破产债务与之相比就显得微不足道了。



A continued infrastructure boom promises ever-greater riches for vested interests both locally and in Beijing. There are ways Xi and Li could defuse the debt time bomb: greater oversight, expanding the municipal bond market, letting localities refinance with direct bond sales, and increased transparency. China could borrow a page from the 1980s U.S. savings-and-loan crisis and set up Resolution Trust Corp.–like entities to dispose of bad debts.

基础设施建设的持续繁荣有望为地方和北京的既得利益者带来更多财富。习近平和李克强有办法拆除债务定时炸弹：加强监管、扩大市政债券市场、让地方通过直接出售债券进行再融资，以及提高透明度。中国可以借鉴 20 世纪 80 年代美国储蓄和贷款危机的经验，成立类似于 Resolution Trust Corp.



But to do any of this, Chinese leaders must be willing to spend political capital at levels that are at least commensurate with the epic flow of ill-gotten gains heading back to the nation’s capital. It will take some serious mettle to avoid a Japan-like funk, and it’s unclear if Xi and Li have it. That means closely studying what Japan got wrong, as well as where officials in Tokyo got it right.

但是，要做到这一点，中国领导人必须愿意花费政治资本，其水平至少要与大量不义之财流回中国首都的速度相称。要避免像日本那样陷入困境，习近平和李克强必须有足够的勇气，但现在还不清楚他们是否具备这种勇气。这意味着要仔细研究日本错在哪里，东京官员又对在哪里。



The Bubble Fix takes on many different forms in Asia. Among the most common might be termed the “Cult of GDP.” In Asia, GDP often seems to stand less for “gross domestic product” than “gross domestic problem.” Leaders can be quite crafty at masking challenges with big-headline growth rates. They are just as much about advertising as they are a diversion. Racy data distract investors from the cracks undermining economies and give politicians room to step before the cameras and say we’re moving forward. What matters is that growth reaches those who most need it. It’s not just a matter of growing faster, but the quality of that growth. By focusing on growth alone without democratizing its benefits, governments risk Arab Spring–like backlashes.

泡沫修复在亚洲有许多不同的形式。其中最常见的可能是 "GDP崇拜"。在亚洲，GDP 似乎并不代表 "国内生产总值"，而是 "国内问题"。领导者可以很狡猾地用大标题式的增长率来掩盖挑战。它们既是广告，也是转移视线。哗众取宠的数据会分散投资者对破坏经济的裂痕的注意力，让政客们有余地在镜头前说我们正在向前迈进。重要的是，增长能惠及最需要的人。这不仅仅是增长速度的问题，而是增长质量的问题。如果政府只关注增长，而不将其利益民主化，就有可能出现类似 "阿拉伯之春 "的反弹。



The Philippines is particularly prone to this phenomenon. Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, president from 2001 to 2010, hid behind 6 percent to 7 percent growth rates as her government did little to attack the corruption concentrating wealth among a small, politically connected elite. In 2012, she was arrested on graft charges, as her immediate predecessor, Joseph Estrada, also had been. Benigno Aquino changed that dynamic when he took office in June 2010. The son of former President Corazon Aquino put Arroyo in jail, faced down the business lobby to pass revenue-raising taxes on cigarettes and liquor, and challenged the powerful Catholic Church by providing free contraceptives to slow population growth. His payoff: investment-grade credit scores for the first time, the support of almost three-quarters of the electorate, and even a place on Time’s 2013 list of 100 most influential people.

菲律宾尤其容易出现这种现象。格洛丽亚-马卡帕加尔-阿罗约（Gloria Macapagal Arroyo）曾于2001年至2010年担任总统，她的政府在打击财富集中在少数政治精英手中的腐败现象方面无所作为，因此她躲在6%至7%的增长率背后。2012年，她因贪污指控被捕，她的前任约瑟夫-埃斯特拉达（Joseph Estrada）也曾因贪污被捕。贝尼尼奥-阿基诺在2010年6月上任后改变了这一态势。这位前总统科拉松-阿基诺（Corazon Aquino）的儿子将阿罗约关进了监狱，与商业游说集团对抗，通过了增加收入的香烟和酒税，并通过提供免费避孕药具来减缓人口增长，向强大的天主教会发起了挑战。他的回报是：首次获得了投资级信用评分，获得了近四分之三选民的支持，甚至还入选了《时代》杂志 2013 年最具影响力的 100 人榜单。



By mid-2013, three years into Aquino’s six-year term, the Philippines was growing faster than China. Yet even reformers are susceptible to resting on their laurels. Aquino’s impressive track record is tarnished by the economy’s failure to create enough good-paying jobs to eradicate poverty and lower an unemployment rate that is among the highest in Southeast Asia. The government’s unsteady rescue efforts following the devastating Typhoon Haiyan in November 2013 also raised some alarm flags. In other words, the hype surrounding 7-percent-plus growth is eclipsing the realities on the ground for the nation’s 106 million people. At a time when the Philippines needs to redouble efforts to attract more foreign direct investment, improve infrastructure, and increase access to education and training, officials in Manila are basking in the headlines and easing up on reform.

到 2013 年年中，即阿基诺六年任期的第三年，菲律宾的经济增长速度超过了中国。然而，即使是改革者也容易安于现状。由于菲律宾经济未能创造足够的高薪工作岗位来消除贫困，也未能降低东南亚最高的失业率，阿基诺令人印象深刻的业绩记录因此蒙上了污点。在2013年11月毁灭性台风 "海燕 "过后，政府不稳定的救援工作也给人们敲响了警钟。换句话说，对菲律宾 1.06 亿人口来说，7% 以上的增长所带来的热潮正在掩盖当地的现实。在菲律宾需要加倍努力吸引更多外国直接投资、改善基础设施、增加教育和培训机会之际，马尼拉的官员们却沉浸在头条新闻中，放松了改革。



The reason the Philippines can’t be happy with big GDP numbers is that Aquino can’t run again, meaning all he’s accomplished could easily be undone by a successor more interested in self-enrichment than good governance. He not only needs to push forward with his reforms now, while he has a popular tailwind, but also must make sure that his foes can’t easily roll them back once he’s gone. The Philippines is but one example of a nation that used to be among Asia’s most troubled that confronts an end-of-tenure drama. Take Indonesia and Myanmar, where former generals have presided over unlikely transitions to democracy and capitalism. In both geopolitically vital nations, the future remains fragile and uncertain. Today’s huge gain could easily be reversed by corrupt or simply ineffective successors.

菲律宾不能对巨大的 GDP 数字感到满意，原因在于阿基诺不能再次参选，这意味着他所取得的一切成就很容易被一个更热衷于自我膨胀而非良好治理的继任者毁于一旦。阿基诺不仅需要趁现在民心所向推进改革，还必须确保他的敌人在他下台后无法轻易将改革推倒重来。菲律宾只是曾经是亚洲最麻烦的国家之一，但现在却面临着任期结束的戏剧性局面。在印度尼西亚和缅甸，前将军们主持了不可能实现的民主和资本主义过渡。在这两个地缘政治上至关重要的国家，未来依然脆弱而不确定。今天取得的巨大成就很容易被腐败或根本无效的继任者逆转。



In Indonesia, President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono has righted a nation that many feared would collapse into post-Soviet-style chaos after the fall of former dictator Suharto. Taking over in 2004 after a string of ineffectual post-crisis leaders, Yudhoyono surrounded himself with competent deputies, modernized the economy, reduced terrorism, rolled back the military’s role in society, and attacked epic levels of corruption. Yet Yudhoyono, who must step down in 2014, has only just introduced a plan to spend $125 billion on infrastructure by 2025. The opportunities for corruption are immense—almost an invitation for a successor to return to the days of crony capitalism.

在印度尼西亚，苏西洛-班邦-尤多约诺（Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono）总统纠正了前独裁者苏哈托（Suharto）下台后许多人担心该国会陷入后苏联式混乱的局面。在经历了一系列危机后领导人的碌碌无为之后，尤多约诺于 2004 年接任总统一职，他的身边围绕着一批能干的副手，实现了经济的现代化，减少了恐怖主义，削弱了军队在社会中的作用，并打击了史无前例的腐败。然而，必须在 2014 年下台的尤多约诺才刚刚推出了一项到 2025 年在基础设施建设上投入 1,250 亿美元的计划。腐败的机会是巨大的--这几乎是在邀请继任者重回裙带资本主义时代。



The challenge in Myanmar is somewhat different, but just like other Southeast Asian nations it’s using asset bubbles to hide underlying economic cracks. Former general Thein Sein has presided over a stunning transformation in just the last two years, opening up a country that was once almost as closed as North Korea. Now, Ford Motor Co. is establishing showrooms in Yangon and companies are angling for a piece of Myanmar’s 64-million-person consumer market. The Davos set gathered in the capital, Naypyidaw, in June 2013 for a summit heralding Myanmar’s reentry into the global economy.

缅甸面临的挑战有些不同，但与其他东南亚国家一样，缅甸也在利用资产泡沫掩盖潜在的经济裂痕。前将军吴登盛在过去两年里主持了一场令人惊叹的变革，开放了这个曾经几乎与朝鲜一样封闭的国家。现在，福特汽车公司（Ford Motor Co.2013 年 6 月，达沃斯的与会者齐聚缅甸首都内比都，参加预示着缅甸重新融入全球经济的峰会。



Yet Thein Sein has said he won’t run in presidential elections scheduled for 2015. Instead, the charismatic Aung San Suu Kyi, whom the former general freed from her long house arrest, may seek the presidency. She’s almost certain to win if she does. No one knows how the Nobel laureate will do as a national leader. There’s broad recognition that Myanmar’s military must work for the country, not the other way around. Will the generals take marching orders from their onetime political prisoner? Moves to further liberalize basic freedoms—not to mention to open up the economy—could well provoke stiffer resistance if they come from Suu Kyi than from one of their own.

然而，吴登盛表示他不会参加定于 2015 年举行的总统选举。相反，被前将军从长期软禁中释放的昂山素季可能会竞选总统。如果昂山素季参选，她几乎肯定会获胜。没有人知道这位诺贝尔奖获得者作为国家领导人会有怎样的表现。人们普遍认为，缅甸军方必须为国家效力，而不是相反。将军们会听命于他们曾经的政治犯吗？进一步放宽基本自由的举措--更不用说开放经济了--如果来自苏姬而不是自己人，很可能会遭到更强烈的抵制。



All of these Asian leaders face the same problem: how to ensure that reforms outlive their tenure and create stable economic models. One way is to leverage their popularity, as Aquino has done. If voters are sold on the benefits to be had from a more efficient economy, they will police the government at the ballot box. Just as important is forging a consensus among business leaders in favor of economic and political progress and creating independent judiciaries and other institutions.

所有这些亚洲领导人都面临着同样的问题：如何确保改革能在其任期内持续下去，并创造稳定的经济模式。一种方法是像阿基诺那样利用自己的声望。如果选民相信更高效的经济能带来好处，他们就会在投票箱前支持政府。同样重要的是在商界领袖中达成共识，支持经济和政治进步，建立独立的司法和其他机构。



At the same time, focusing too much on individual personalities has traditionally been part of the problem in Asia. Leaders must groom a crop of potential successors who share their ideals and integrity. That means remaking political parties, too, so that they’re not personal vehicles but truly meritocratic organizations. The allies Aquino helped elect to the Philippines Senate in 2013, for example, are considered serious, reformist lawmakers, not yes-men. They’ll be judged less on their personal loyalty to Aquino than their ability to sustain progressive policies.

与此同时，过于注重个人的个性历来是亚洲问题的一部分。领导人必须培养一批与自己志同道合、品行端正的潜在接班人。这也意味着要改造政党，使其不再是个人的工具，而是真正任人唯贤的组织。例如，阿基诺在2013年帮助选举进入菲律宾参议院的盟友被认为是严肃的改革派立法者，而不是唯唯诺诺的人。评判他们的标准不是他们对阿基诺的个人忠诚度，而是他们是否有能力维持进步政策。



These are, in one sense, enviable problems to face. In the past, Asian voters had to worry far more about how to get rid of wayward leaders, whether dictators like Suharto in Indonesia, entrenched and overly dominant parties like the Liberal Democratic Party in Japan, or allegedly corrupt executives like Aquino’s predecessor Arroyo. The fact that many countries are now fretting about losing good leaders is a sign of maturity. The next step is to detach these issues from the Bubble Fix and individuals and to cement the constituency for change across the population. That’s the campaign these lame ducks need to wage next.

从某种意义上说，这些都是令人羡慕的问题。过去，亚洲选民更担心的是如何摆脱不听话的领导人，无论是印尼苏哈托这样的独裁者，还是日本自民党这样根深蒂固、过度主导的政党，抑或是阿基诺的前任阿罗约这样涉嫌腐败的行政官员。现在，许多国家都在为失去优秀领导人而忧心忡忡，这是成熟的标志。下一步是将这些问题从泡沫修复和个人中剥离出来，并在全体民众中巩固变革的支持者。这就是这些跛脚鸭接下来需要发起的运动。





Thailand is another case in point. In her two-plus years leading Thailand’s 67 million people, Yingluck Shinawatra has managed to tamp down the virtual civil war that led to the ouster of her prime minister brother in 2006. Yet the thrust of Yingluck’s economic policies is a Japan-like emphasis on scoring political points today at the expense of tomorrow. Her government has subsidized rice prices, provided handouts to car buyers, and favored megaprojects that will enrich the politically connected more than the masses. That comes at the expense of long-term competitiveness and prosperity. Thailand should instead be investing in its future, especially education, if it wants to break out of the “middle-income trap” that befalls many developing nations.

泰国是另一个典型的例子。在领导泰国 6700 万人民的两年多时间里，英拉-西那瓦成功地平息了导致其总理哥哥于 2006 年下台的内战。然而，英拉经济政策的主旨却像日本一样，以牺牲明天为代价，强调今天的政治得分。她的政府补贴大米价格，向汽车购买者施舍，并支持那些能让政治关联人士比大众更富裕的大型项目。这是以牺牲长期竞争力和繁荣为代价的。泰国要想摆脱许多发展中国家所遭遇的 "中等收入陷阱"，就应该投资于自己的未来，尤其是教育。



Moody’s Investors Service warns that too many lavish and nearsighted subsidies will damage Thailand’s credit rating. Yingluck’s priorities bear troubling similarities to those her exiled brother, Thaksin Shinawatra, championed from 2001 to 2006. His overhyped “Thaksinomics” never amounted to more than a Tammany Hall–like doling out of cash in return for rural votes.

穆迪投资者服务公司（Moody's Investors Service）警告说，过多的奢侈和近视补贴将损害泰国的信用评级。英拉的优先事项与她流亡海外的哥哥他信-西那瓦（Thaksin Shinawatra）在 2001 年至 2006 年期间倡导的优先事项有着令人不安的相似之处。他信的 "他信经济学 "被炒得过火，但其实不过是他信为了换取农村选票而采取的一种类似于 "塔曼尼大厅"（Tammany Hall）的派发现金的做法。



In January 2013, Yingluck unveiled a plan to lift Thai living standards. She proposed spending about $72 billion over 10 years on transportation, energy, and telecommunications projects. Yingluck’s government is pushing an $8.6 billion port-and-industrial-zone project in neighboring Myanmar. In June in Turkey, she called for a “New Silk Road” rail project to link Europe and Asia. Forgotten in this ambitious building boom, though, is any investment in social infrastructure. It’s even more important to invest billions of dollars in education and in training to improve the quality of the labor force and raise productivity so that Thailand can keep up in the world’s most dynamic region. The country lags not just at the tertiary level, but also at the primary and secondary phases of the education process. Like several other countries in the region, Thailand’s focus on rote learning gives short shrift to creative and critical thinking and English proficiency.

2013 年 1 月，英拉公布了一项提高泰国生活水平的计划。她提议在 10 年内投入约 720 亿美元用于交通、能源和电信项目。英拉政府正在邻国缅甸推动一个耗资 86 亿美元的港口和工业区项目。6 月，她在土耳其呼吁建设连接欧亚的 "新丝绸之路 "铁路项目。然而，在这场雄心勃勃的建设热潮中，却忽略了对社会基础设施的投资。更重要的是，要在教育和培训方面投资数十亿美元，以提高劳动力素质和生产率，从而使泰国能够在世界上最具活力的地区保持领先地位。泰国不仅在高等教育方面落后，在初等和中等教育阶段也是如此。与该地区的其他几个国家一样，泰国注重死记硬背，而忽视了创造性思维、批判性思维和英语能力。



“There is little sign that inadequate investment in human capital and the need for reform of the education system is recognized by the current government,” said economist Peter Warr at the Australian National University in Canberra. He’s done extensive research on Thailand’s economic growing pains.

"堪培拉澳大利亚国立大学的经济学家彼得-瓦尔（Peter Warr）说："几乎没有迹象表明，本届政府认识到人力资本投资不足和教育系统改革的必要性。他对泰国经济的成长之痛进行了广泛的研究。



Thailand matters because it’s often seen as a role model in the region. As Myanmar exits decades of isolation and tries to build a healthy economy, it’s looking to Thailand for direction and financing. The same goes for Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam. How Thailand evolves will reverberate around the neighborhood.

泰国之所以重要，是因为它经常被视为该地区的榜样。随着缅甸摆脱数十年的孤立状态，并努力建设健康的经济，它正在向泰国寻求方向和资金。柬埔寨、老挝和越南也是如此。泰国如何发展将在周边地区产生影响。



At the moment, Thailand is walking in place even if its headline growth rates outpace Japan, the United States, and Europe. To Bank of Thailand economist Piti Disyatat, per-capita gross domestic product tells the story: It has been hovering around 15 to 20 percent of U.S. levels for more than 10 years. This is a precarious moment for Thailand to be stuck at a per-capita GDP of about $5,000. Global growth is tepid, China is slowing, and Indonesia, the Philippines, and Vietnam are winning jobs that Thailand once took for granted. As Thai wages rise, so do production costs. It must move faster up the value chain to build more technologically advanced products in the electronics and automobile sectors—preferably bearing Thai names, not just Japanese ones.

目前，即使泰国的总体增长率超过了日本、美国和欧洲，但泰国仍在原地踏步。泰国银行经济学家皮提-迪斯亚特（Piti Disyatat）认为，人均国内生产总值说明了一切：十多年来，人均国内生产总值一直徘徊在美国水平的 15% 到 20%。泰国的人均国内生产总值还停留在 5,000 美元左右的水平，这对泰国来说是一个岌岌可危的时刻。全球经济增长乏力，中国经济增长放缓，印尼、菲律宾和越南赢得了泰国曾经认为理所当然的工作机会。随着泰国工资的上涨，生产成本也在上升。泰国必须更快地提升价值链，在电子和汽车领域制造技术更先进的产品--最好是带有泰国名字的产品，而不仅仅是日本名字。



Building a more entrepreneurial workforce requires doing better than Japan Inc. has. It requires innovative policies, big investments, and political will, all of which are in short supply. Corruption, among other things, skews incentives. Massive road, bridge, and power-grid projects are dripping with opportunities for politicians and businesspeople to line their pockets. “There are few if any kickbacks available from investment in education,” Warr said. “Physical infrastructure is another matter.”

建设一支更具创业精神的劳动力队伍需要比日本公司做得更好。这需要创新政策、巨额投资和政治意愿，而所有这些都很缺乏。腐败等因素导致激励机制失衡。大规模的道路、桥梁和电网项目充斥着政客和商人中饱私囊的机会。"教育投资几乎没有回扣可拿，"瓦尔说。"有形基础设施则是另一回事。



Thaksin’s policy of cash handouts to rural areas was the economic equivalent of a sugar high, not unlike Abenomics. It did nothing to strengthen government institutions, build a credible legal system, or invest in human capital. The five prime ministers who led Thailand between Thaksin’s ouster and his sister’s victory in July 2011 spent all their time avoiding another coup. Thailand must invest in the future. Pouring more money into people rather than rice farms and construction companies, Japan-style, would be a good start.

他信向农村地区派发现金的政策在经济上等同于 "糖衣炮弹"，与 "安倍经济学 "并无二致。它在加强政府机构、建立可信的法律体系或投资人力资本方面毫无建树。从他信下台到他的妹妹在 2011 年 7 月获胜，领导泰国的五位总理把所有时间都花在了避免再次发生政变上。泰国必须投资于未来。把更多的资金投入到人民身上，而不是日本式的稻米农场和建筑公司，将是一个良好的开端。



Our search for potential lost decades also must bring us to India. With its sub-5-percent economic growth, young population, and vast potential, the world’s biggest democracy may not seem to be on the verge of a crisis. Look closer, though, at the political chaos in India and things come into focus: The odds of a lost decade are growing, with implications that would be ruinous. India’s growth in 2013 has been the weakest in 10 years. That can’t be blamed just on Europe’s debt crisis, faltering U.S. growth, or China’s slowdown. No; this slackening is the fault of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and the inability of India’s leadership to bring about the needed reforms to an economy hamstrung by bureaucracy and entrenched interests.

我们寻找潜在的 "失去的几十年 "也必须把我们带到印度。凭借低于 5% 的经济增长率、年轻的人口和巨大的潜力，这个世界上最大的民主国家似乎并没有濒临危机。但仔细观察印度的政治乱局，我们就会发现问题的症结所在：失去十年的可能性正在增加，其影响将是毁灭性的。印度2013年的经济增长是10年来最弱的。这不能仅仅归咎于欧洲债务危机、美国增长乏力或中国经济放缓。不，增长放缓是印度总理曼莫汉-辛格的过错，也是印度领导层无力对被官僚主义和根深蒂固的利益集团束缚的经济进行必要改革的过错。



Singh must get some credit for at least trying. He has backed efforts to allow foreign investment in supermarkets, airlines, and other industries, and to reduce $8 billion of subsidies that contribute to the widest budget deficit among major emerging economies. These efforts have stalled, thanks mostly to his self-serving critics. And these days, that means Mamata Banerjee, who has rallied opposition to Singh’s plans. Among her more unhelpful achievements, she has made it harder for companies to buy land, setting back expansion plans by Tata Motors Ltd. and Infosys Ltd.

辛格至少做出了努力，这一点必须得到肯定。他支持允许外商投资超市、航空公司和其他行业，并减少 80 亿美元的补贴，这些补贴造成了主要新兴经济体中最广泛的预算赤字。这些努力之所以停滞不前，主要归功于他那些自私自利的批评者。如今，这些批评者就是玛玛塔-班纳吉（Mamata Banerjee），她曾团结起来反对辛格的计划。在她所取得的无益成就中，她加大了企业购买土地的难度，导致塔塔汽车公司（Tata Motors Ltd.）和Infosys有限公司（Infosys Ltd.）的扩张计划受挫。



Banerjee personifies why India relies on half-measures and easy credit to prop up growth when what’s really needed is massive restructuring. Really, if economist Joseph Schumpeter had an alter ego, one bent on halting the creative destruction that shucks off old stagnant industries to make way for the new, the chief minister of the West Bengal state would be it. She has emerged as the most strident opponent of the coalition government of which she’s a part. Not surprisingly, investors aren’t sticking around, sending Indian stocks down.

班纳吉体现了印度为何依赖半途而废的措施和宽松的信贷来支撑经济增长，而真正需要的是大规模的结构调整。实际上，如果经济学家约瑟夫-熊彼特（Joseph Schumpeter）有另一个自我，一心想阻止创造性破坏，即淘汰停滞不前的旧产业，为新产业让路，那么西孟加拉邦的首席部长就是这样的人。她已成为联合政府最强烈的反对者。毫不奇怪，投资者并没有坚持到底，这导致印度股市下跌。



Yet as wrong as Banerjee is on the economics, as retrograde as her ideas are in the age of globalization, she’s only a symptom of the real problem, which is India’s political system, and Singh’s failure to regain some semblance of control over it risks surrendering a decade of economic progress.

然而，尽管班纳吉在经济学上是错误的，尽管她的观点在全球化时代是倒退的，但她只是真正问题的表象，那就是印度的政治体制，辛格如果不能在某种程度上恢复对政治体制的控制，就有可能将十年来取得的经济进步拱手相让。



When will India’s leaders realize that growth alone isn’t enough? China’s authoritarian government can get away with ignoring structural flaws with impressive gross domestic product figures. The interesting thing about the scandal surrounding Bo Xilai, a former senior figure in the Communist Party now occupying a jail cell, is that investors were so nonplussed. The odyssey of rights activist Chen Guangcheng caused nary a ripple in markets. For all China’s troubles, many investors have faith that policy makers are tending to the economy. India doesn’t have that luxury.

印度领导人什么时候才能意识到仅有增长是不够的？中国的专制政府可以通过令人印象深刻的国内生产总值数字来忽视结构性缺陷。薄熙来曾是共产党的高级官员，如今却锒铛入狱，围绕薄熙来的丑闻的有趣之处在于，投资者对此并不感到惊讶。维权人士陈光诚的 "奥德赛 "在市场上没有引起任何波澜。尽管中国麻烦重重，但许多投资者相信，政策制定者正在关注中国经济。印度却没有这样的奢望。



Asia’s third-biggest economy needs to constantly remind and convince investors that market liberalization is moving forward, even if progress is gradual and unsteady. Right now, India is failing miserably. With each passing day, Singh’s inability to marshal a consensus confirms the perception that officials in New Delhi are weak, distracted, indecisive, and overwhelmed by divergent interests.

这个亚洲第三大经济体需要不断提醒并说服投资者，市场自由化正在向前推进，即使进展是渐进和不稳定的。现在，印度正在惨遭失败。随着时间一天天过去，辛格无法达成共识的事实证实了人们的看法，即新德里的官员们软弱无能、心不在焉、优柔寡断，被不同的利益冲昏了头脑。



A broad economic overhaul that didn’t rely on bubble fixes seemed plausible back in mid-2009, when Singh won reelection with a solid mandate. Many bright-eyed observers, including me, thought the former central bank governor who masterminded a set of market changes in the 1990s that propelled India’s rapid growth would shake up the economy. Four-plus years later, India is behind schedule on reforms, imperiling the longer-term possibility that it might catch up to, or even trump, China someday. A reasonable argument can be made that based on demographics alone, youthful India with 1.2 billion people could surpass the growth rates of aging China a decade from now, but not if India’s dysfunction continues to sabotage its potential.

早在 2009 年年中，当辛格在稳固的授权下赢得连任时，一场不依赖于泡沫修复的广泛经济改革似乎是可信的。包括我在内的许多目光敏锐的观察家都认为，这位曾在上世纪 90 年代策划了一系列市场变革，推动印度经济快速增长的前央行行长将撼动印度经济。四年多过去了，印度的改革进度落后于计划，这危及了印度有朝一日赶上甚至超越中国的长期可能性。有一种合理的论点认为，仅从人口结构来看，拥有 12 亿人口的年轻印度可能在十年后超过老龄化的中国，但如果印度的功能失调继续破坏其潜力，这种论点就不成立了。



India needs some serious creative destruction, far beyond what Schumpeter had in mind when he championed market forces exacting the change that only unfettered competition can bring. None of it is occurring. India even risks losing its investment-grade status, the first of the BRIC nations—Brazil, Russia, India, and China—to suffer the indignity. Standard & Poor’s consistently warns that India’s politics is “unfavorable.”

印度需要一些严重的创造性破坏，这远远超出了熊彼特在倡导市场力量带来变革时的设想，只有不受约束的竞争才能带来变革。但这些都没有发生。印度甚至面临失去投资级地位的风险，在 "金砖四国"--巴西、俄罗斯、印度和中国--中，印度是第一个蒙受这一耻辱的国家。标准普尔一直警告说，印度的政治是 "不利的"。



If India were more focused on broad reforms, Banerjee’s antics would be a sideshow. Singh needs to make sure that India has coherent policies and the political support to see them implemented. There’s no question that capitalism can be a harsh taskmaster, and that checks and balances are needed in a nation where two-thirds of the population lives in extreme poverty. Yet, without taking some risks that might lead India to a higher-growth path, the economy will lose altitude, poverty will increase, and, far from shining, much will be lost.

如果印度更加专注于广泛的改革，班纳吉的反常举动就会成为配角。辛格需要确保印度有连贯的政策和政治支持来保证这些政策的实施。毫无疑问，资本主义可能是一个严苛的管理者，在一个三分之二的人口生活在极端贫困中的国家，需要制衡。然而，如果不冒一些风险，将印度引向更高的增长道路，印度的经济将失去高度，贫困将加剧，不仅不会大放异彩，反而会损失惨重。



Asian policy makers must be mindful that economic reforms that increase efficiency and spread the benefits of growth will always pay greater dividends than the Bubble Fix. Excess stimulus and massive capital inflows have a way of boosting growth and offering a false sense recovery is afoot. In reality, they just create new bubbles. Asia did an impressive job of weathering the 2008 global financial crisis. But since then, the lack of economic change has restrained its potential.

亚洲的政策制定者们必须牢记，提高效率和分散增长收益的经济改革所带来的红利永远大于泡沫修复。过度刺激和大量资本流入有可能推动经济增长，让人产生复苏正在到来的错觉。实际上，它们只会制造新的泡沫。亚洲在 2008 年全球金融危机中的表现令人印象深刻。但从那时起，由于缺乏经济变革，亚洲的潜力受到了限制。



Japanese, too, wonder where it all went so wrong. The search for an answer has even inspired the entertainment industry. Take the 2007 film, Bubble Fiction, a comedy timed to commemorate the tenth anniversary of Yamaichi’s demise. It was the tale of precocious 20-year-old woman sent back in time on an important mission for the Finance Ministry: to warn Japan that a crash was afoot and to stop it. What the movie lacked in cinematic excellence, it made up for in quirkiness. Think Doctor Who meets Wall Street with a dash of Bridget Jones tossed in. Shortly after seeing it, I chatted about the movie with Kuroda, who then was president of the Asian Development Bank. He agreed that the idea of returning to Tokyo, circa 1990, to right any number of wrongs was oddly thought-provoking. What if policy makers could go back and fix their biggest screwups?

日本人也想知道这一切究竟是哪里出了错。寻找答案的过程甚至激发了娱乐业的灵感。以 2007 年的电影《泡沫小说》为例，这是一部为纪念山一逝世十周年而拍摄的喜剧片。影片讲述了一位早熟的 20 岁女性被派往过去为大藏省执行一项重要任务的故事：警告日本正在发生崩盘，并阻止它的发生。这部电影在电影方面的不足，在奇特性方面得到了弥补。想想《神秘博士》与《华尔街》的结合，再加上一点《布里奇特-琼斯》的影子。看完电影后不久，我与时任亚洲开发银行行长的黑田聊起了这部电影。他也认为，回到 1990 年左右的东京纠正各种错误的想法很奇怪，发人深省。如果决策者可以回到过去，纠正他们最大的失误，那会怎样？



Certainly, Summers might like to revisit 1999 to stop the repeal of Glass-Steagall firewalls that enabled the financial industry to dwarf the entire economy. Greenspan might like to return to December 1996 and do more than just make ambiguous warnings about “irrational exuberance.” Hans Tietmeyer might fancy a return to his days as German Bundesbank president to speak out even more forcefully against the financial engineering that turned investment products into pure alchemy. Thai officials might want to go back to the Bangkok of July 1997 and handle the baht devaluation differently.

当然，萨默斯可能希望重温 1999 年，阻止废除格拉斯-斯蒂格尔防火墙，因为该防火墙使金融业得以使整个经济相形见绌。格林斯潘也许想回到 1996 年 12 月，做更多的事情，而不仅仅是对 "非理性繁荣 "发出模棱两可的警告。汉斯-蒂特迈尔也许想回到他担任德国联邦银行行长的日子，更加有力地反对将投资产品变成纯粹炼金术的金融工程。泰国官员也许想回到 1997 年 7 月的曼谷，以不同的方式处理泰铢贬值问题。



George Soros could return to 1992, bet even bigger against the Bank of England, and double his $2 billion profit. Nick Leeson, the trader who brought down Barings PLC, could return to 1995 and bet on Japanese stocks plunging, rather than rallying. John Meriwether of Long-Term Capital Management could travel back to 1998 and make money from Russia’s bond default, instead of being ruined by it. New York Fed Bank President William McDonough could go back and argue against the bailout he cobbled together for Meriwether.

乔治-索罗斯可以回到 1992 年，对英格兰银行下更大的赌注，让他的 20 亿美元利润翻番。让霸菱公司倒闭的交易员尼克-利森（Nick Leeson）可以回到 1995 年，押注日本股市暴跌，而不是反弹。长期资本管理公司（Long-Term Capital Management）的约翰-梅里韦瑟（John Meriwether）可以回到 1998 年，从俄罗斯的债券违约中赚钱，而不是被它毁掉。纽约联储银行行长威廉-麦克多诺（William McDonough）可以回到过去，反对他为梅里韦瑟拼凑的救助计划。



In Japan’s case, the first effort at revisionism might be the Plaza Accord of 1985, which sharply weakened the dollar versus the yen. It did little to improve the U.S. balance of payments, but contributed to asset bubbles that led to Japan’s lost decade in the 1990s. The second stop: then–BOJ Governor Yasushi Mieno, to keep him from hiking short-term interest rates so rapidly, wiping out $15 trillion in wealth and triggering an economic malaise that still drags on. It would also be wise to travel back in time and meet with Governor Hayami and talk him out of cutting rates to zero, ground zero for the Bubble Fix still afflicting the economy. It took the onus off timid politicians who should’ve been reforming the economy’s structure.

就日本而言，第一次修正主义的努力可能是 1985 年的广场协议，该协议大幅削弱了美元对日元的汇率。该协议对改善美国的国际收支几乎毫无帮助，但却助长了资产泡沫，导致日本在 20 世纪 90 年代陷入了失去的十年。第二站：时任日本央行行长的三园康（Yasushi Mieno），让他不要如此迅速地提高短期利率，使 15 万亿美元的财富化为乌有，并引发了至今仍在持续的经济萎靡。如果能穿越时空，与早见行长会面，劝说他不要将利率降至零，这也是仍在困扰经济的 "泡沫修复 "的原点，也不失为明智之举。这让本应改革经济结构的胆小政客们卸下了责任。



Tokyo lawmakers also might want to return to Washington on October 10, 2010, when then–Bank of Japan Governor Masaaki Shirakawa told the world what it should have learned from his nation’s lost decades: “Structural reform is indispensable.” The first significant step Abe took after returning to the prime minister’s office in December 2012 was engineering Shirakawa’s ouster from a job few thought he had performed competently. But contained in his speech two years earlier was the real Holy Grail for which international policy makers should be searching:

2010 年 10 月 10 日，时任日本央行行长的白川方明（Masaaki Shirakawa）告诉世界，东京的立法者们应该从日本失去的几十年中学到什么："结构改革不可或缺"。2012 年 12 月，安倍重返首相府后采取的第一个重大举措就是让白川正明下台，很少有人认为他能胜任这份工作。但是，安倍两年前的讲话才是国际政策制定者应该寻找的真正圣杯：



If foreign countries mistakenly draw the most crucial lesson from Japan’s experience as the necessity of short-term stimulative policy measures, they will face a risk of writing the wrong policy prescription. I do not go into the details of economic policy in each country, but I think that it is crucial to maintain the flexibility of the economic structure to smoothly reallocate labor and capital from the lower productivity sector to the higher productivity sector. That is, however, not necessarily easy, given the social climate after the burst of the bubble.

如果外国错误地从日本的经验中吸取最关键的教训，即必须采取短期刺激性政策措施，那么它们将面临开出错误政策处方的风险。我不想细谈各国经济政策的细节，但我认为，保持经济结构的灵活性，使劳动力和资本顺利地从生产率较低的部门重新配置到生产率较高的部门，是至关重要的。然而，考虑到泡沫破灭后的社会氛围，做到这一点并不一定容易。





Rather than “smoothly reallocate” the forces that propelled Japan into the orbit of the Group of Seven nations and created breathtaking success and wealth, rather than veer in a different policy direction, rather than thinking out of the proverbial box, officials in Tokyo doubled down again and again on ultralow rates, bubbles, and economic inertia. If there is any mistake Japanese policy makers might love to travel back in time to fix, it’s this one.

东京的官员们没有 "平稳地重新分配 "推动日本进入七国集团轨道并创造了令人惊叹的成功和财富的力量，没有转向不同的政策方向，没有跳出俗话说的框框，而是一次又一次地在超低利率、泡沫和经济惯性上加倍努力。如果说日本政策制定者最想穿越时空来纠正什么错误的话，那就是这个错误了。





Chapter 2

The Female Problem

How Institutionalized Sexism Kills Growth

第 2 章女性问题制度化的性别歧视如何扼杀成长





In October 2000, I found myself sitting next to Sheryl Sandberg in Tokyo, long before she joined Facebook Inc. and wrote her bestselling book on female empowerment. We were listening to her boss at the time, U.S. Treasury Secretary Summers, speak about the need for structural reforms to the Japanese economy, in a giant auditorium devoid of women. It was one of several male-dominated events that day where the only women around were serving us tea, not participating in discussions about Japan’s economy and politics. The author of Lean In leaned over and asked me half-seriously: “There are women in this country, right?”

2000 年 10 月，在东京，我发现自己坐在雪莉-桑德伯格（Sheryl Sandberg）旁边，那时她还没有加入 Facebook 公司，也没有写出关于女性赋权的畅销书。在一个没有女性的巨大礼堂里，我们聆听了她当时的上司、美国财政部长萨默斯关于日本经济结构改革必要性的演讲。这是当天几个男性主导的活动之一，周围只有女性在为我们端茶倒水，而不是参与有关日本经济和政治的讨论。Lean In》一书的作者凑过来，半真半假地问我："这个国家也有女性吧？"



Thirteen-plus years on, Japan’s leaders are only now realizing that the two problems are intertwined: The lack of women in the workforce poses one of the biggest structural impediments to faster growth. Japan’s institutionalized sexism deepens deflation, hurts competitiveness, and exacerbates the demographic trends that make Japan’s debt load so dangerous. It’s a reminder to policy makers everywhere, be they running huge economies or small ones, that sexism is dismal economics.

13 年多过去了，日本领导人现在才意识到这两个问题是相互交织的：劳动力中缺乏女性是阻碍经济快速增长的最大结构性障碍之一。日本制度化的性别歧视加深了通货紧缩，损害了竞争力，并加剧了使日本债务负担如此危险的人口趋势。这提醒着世界各地的政策制定者，无论他们管理的是大型经济体还是小型经济体，性别歧视都是令人沮丧的经济学。



Yet, in July 2013, when Sandberg visited Tokyo to promote her book, I would have liked to relay good news about gender progress in Japan. I would have loved to bring her up to date about how Japan had made great strides since October 2000 in helping women reach high places in business and politics. It would have been great to detail how Abe was putting forth bold and innovative strategies to better utilize half of the nation’s population. It would have been grand to tell her that Japan had anything good to teach the world about gender dynamics. Unfortunately, Asia’s most developed nation has a decidedly developing-nation view of its women. In fact, a number of far less developed nations in Asia—Malaysia and the Philippines included—are markedly more enlightened about how underutilizing half of your population is retrograde economics. If anyone needs a lean-in movement, it’s the women of Japan.

然而，2013 年 7 月，当桑德伯格访问东京为她的新书做宣传时，我本想向她转达日本在性别平等方面取得进步的好消息。我很想向她介绍日本自2000年10月以来在帮助女性进入商界和政界高层方面取得的长足进步。如果能详细介绍安倍晋三如何提出大胆创新的战略，更好地利用全国一半的人口，那就太好了。如果能告诉她，日本在性别动态方面有什么好东西可以教给世界，那就太好了。不幸的是，这个亚洲最发达的国家对其女性的看法却明显是发展中国家的看法。事实上，亚洲许多欠发达国家--包括马来西亚和菲律宾--对于如何利用不足的一半人口是倒退的经济学都有明显的启发。如果说谁需要一场 "靠拢运动"，那一定是日本妇女。





Japan ranks a dismal 105th in gender equality—behind Cambodia, Burkina Faso, Malaysia, and far behind China—out of 136 countries analyzed by the World Economic Forum. Not a single Nikkei 225 company is run by a woman, while female participation in politics is negligible. Only 30 companies on the Nikkei, and 130 out of the 1,600-plus companies listed on the Tokyo Stock Price Index, have a female board member. And Japan’s male–female wage gap is double the average in Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries.

在世界经济论坛分析的 136 个国家中，日本在性别平等方面排名第 105 位，落后于柬埔寨、布基纳法索和马来西亚，也远远落后于中国。日经 225 指数中没有一家公司是由女性经营的，而女性参与政治的程度也微乎其微。日经指数上只有 30 家公司有女性董事会成员，东京股票价格指数的 1600 多家上市公司中也只有 130 家有女性董事会成员。日本的男女工资差距是经济合作与发展组织（OECD）国家平均水平的两倍。



“Women could actually save Japan,” IMF’s managing director, Christine Lagarde, said in Tokyo in October 2012. “Today you have five out of 10 Japanese women out of the job market, as opposed to two out of 10 men.”

"国际货币基金组织总裁克里斯蒂娜-拉加德 2012 年 10 月在东京表示："女性实际上可以拯救日本。"如今，每10名日本女性中就有5人失业，而每10名男性中就有2人失业。



One single number explains why Japan must pull more women into the job market and help them achieve leadership roles: 15 percent. That’s how much of a boost GDP would receive if female employment matched men’s (about 80%), according to Goldman Sachs. “Japan is lagging because it’s running a marathon with one leg,” said Kathy Matsui, the chief Goldman Sachs Japan equity strategist, who has been churning out “Womenomics” reports regularly since 1999. “It must start tapping its most underutilized resource.”

一个数字就能解释为什么日本必须让更多女性进入就业市场，并帮助她们担任领导职务：15%。根据高盛（Goldman Sachs）的数据，如果女性就业率与男性就业率（约 80%）相当，那么 GDP 就会得到如此大的提升。"高盛日本股票首席策略师凯西-松井（Kathy Matsui）说："日本之所以落后，是因为它在用一条腿跑马拉松。她自 1999 年起就定期撰写 "女性经济学 "报告。"日本必须开始利用其最未得到充分利用的资源"。



This most self-inflicted of Japanese wounds is dawning in Japan’s government, too. “If these women rise up,” Abe said at a September 2013 speech at the United Nations, “I believe Japan can achieve strong growth.” Also that month, Abe wrote in a Wall Street Journal op-ed that “unleashing the potential of Womenomics is an absolute must if Japan’s growth is to continue.”

这种日本人最自残的伤痛也在日本政府中逐渐显现。"安倍晋三 2013 年 9 月在联合国发表演讲时说："如果这些女性站起来，我相信日本能够实现强劲增长。也是在那个月，安倍晋三在《华尔街日报》的专栏文章中写道，"如果日本要继续增长，释放女性经济学的潜力是绝对必须的"。



Abe’s stated goal is this: a 2 percent increase in productivity over the mid- to long term will produce, in 10 years, an average of 2 percent of inflation-adjusted GDP growth. Getting there requires capitalizing on the power of women. That means boosting their workforce participation from about 63 percent to 73 percent by 2020 and bridging the wage–equality gap. Women in Japan, by official government estimates, earn on average 30.2 percent less than men, versus 20.1 percent in the United States. “The target year 2020 will coincide with the return of the Olympics to Tokyo,” Abe wrote. “I am determined that by that time Japan’s boardrooms will be enhanced by a greatly increased number of female directors. I will do all that I can to facilitate this change.”

安倍晋三的既定目标是：在中长期内将生产率提高 2%，在 10 年内实现经通胀调整后的 GDP 平均增长 2%。要实现这一目标，就必须充分利用女性的力量。这意味着到 2020 年，要将女性劳动力参与率从 63% 提高到 73%，并缩小工资差距。据日本政府官方估计，日本女性的平均收入比男性低 30.2%，而美国女性的平均收入比男性低 20.1%。"安倍晋三在信中写道："2020 年的目标将与奥运会重返东京的时间相吻合。安倍晋三写道，"我决心到那时，日本董事会中的女性董事人数将大幅增加。我将尽我所能促进这一变化"。



Abe has indeed stepped up with a three-pronged effort to address the problem. It’s troubling, though, that his proposals hardly match his rhetoric. So far, he’s focused on extending child-care leave, expanding day-care facilities, and asking companies to hire female board members. Yet Abe’s government is barely scratching the surface and is reinforcing stereotypes about the role of women in society. Abe is asking his government, for example, to circulate “Women’s Notebooks” to warn of the evils of postponing marriage and motherhood. Yes, the subtext seems to suggest, career-oriented women are selfish. What’s more, when Abe calls on companies to provide three years of maternity leave, he uses a Japanese expression that a child should be held by its mother until the age of 3. Yes, kids are women’s work. Won’t knowing that a three-year absence could derail their careers only encourage women to further delay childbirth? Abenomics’s brush with Womenomics already lacks creativity and urgency.

安倍晋三确实已经采取了三管齐下的措施来解决这一问题。但令人不安的是，他的建议与他的言论几乎不符。到目前为止，他的重点是延长育儿假、扩大日托设施以及要求公司聘用女性董事会成员。然而，安倍晋三政府所做的仅仅是表面文章，而且还在强化人们对女性社会角色的刻板印象。例如，安倍要求政府分发 "女性笔记本"，告诫人们推迟结婚和生育的弊端。是的，潜台词似乎在暗示，以事业为重的女性是自私的。更有甚者，当安倍晋三呼吁企业提供三年产假时，他使用了日本的一种说法，即孩子应该由母亲抱到 3 岁。如果知道三年产假可能会影响她们的职业生涯，这难道不会鼓励女性进一步推迟生育吗？安倍经济学与 "女性经济学 "的擦肩而过已经缺乏创造性和紧迫性。



The first step Abe should take is to actually enforce the 1986 Equal Employment Opportunity Law, one that has never been fully understood or enforced. Next, Japan should promote diversity and offer tax incentives to companies that do, as well. More-flexible work hours would draw women into the workforce. So would offering subsidized or free day care so more families can afford it. Quotas for female executives also are worth considering. A 2012 McKinsey & Co. report titled “Women Matter” bemoaned the low percentage of female Japanese managers and found companies that champion diversity are more profitable and innovative. Women are good for business, not charity cases.

安倍应采取的第一步是切实执行 1986 年的《平等就业机会法》，该法从未得到充分理解或执行。其次，日本应促进多元化，并为这样做的公司提供税收优惠。更灵活的工作时间将吸引女性加入劳动力大军。提供补贴或免费的日托服务也能让更多家庭负担得起。女性高管配额也值得考虑。麦肯锡公司 2012 年发布的一份题为 "女性很重要 "的报告对日本女性管理者比例偏低表示遗憾，并发现倡导多元化的公司利润更高，创新能力更强。女性对企业有利，而非慈善机构。



Part of the problem is Abe’s motivation. He is acting from fiscal necessity, not from a sense of social justice or economic logic. As Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s Investors Service warn, Japan’s workforce is shrinking as the population ages and the birthrate declines. That might be manageable if not for a public debt more than twice the size of the economy and the forces of deflation that only necessitate ever more borrowing down the road.

问题的一部分在于安倍晋三的动机。他的行动是出于财政需要，而不是出于社会正义感或经济逻辑。正如标准普尔（Standard & Poor's）和穆迪投资者服务公司（Moody's Investors Service）所警告的那样，随着人口老龄化和出生率下降，日本的劳动力正在萎缩。如果不是因为公共债务是经济规模的两倍多，以及通货紧缩的力量导致必须在未来不断增加借贷，这种情况也许是可以控制的。



Politically, too, increasing the number of women workers is an easier sell than opening up Japan to immigrant labor. It’s far less controversial than lifting barriers to immigration and easier than tightening corporate governance, tweaking taxes to support startup companies, crafting new energy policies that create jobs, cut prices, and phase out nuclear reactors in seismically active Japan, introducing more flexibility into labor markets, ending protections enjoyed by farmers, medical services, or fisheries, or retooling the education system. Manipulating exchange rates is simply easier than upending Japan’s postwar model. So is focusing on the economics of gender.

在政治上，增加女工人数也比向移民劳工开放日本要容易得多。它远比取消移民壁垒更不容易引起争议，也比收紧企业管理、调整税收以支持创业公司、制定新的能源政策以创造就业机会、降低价格并在地震活跃的日本逐步淘汰核反应堆、为劳动力市场引入更多灵活性、结束对农民、医疗服务或渔业的保护或重新调整教育体系更容易。操纵汇率比改变日本的战后模式要容易得多。关注性别经济学也是如此。



Better utilizing the female workforce is the lowest-hanging of economic fruits for Abe. So why tackle the issue in such a timid and dispassionate way? After all, institutionalized sexism exacerbates many of the biggest challenges facing Japan today. For example, it worsens the nation’s demographics. For many women, delaying childbirth is a form of rebellion against societal expectations to have children and become housewives. While things are improving, having children remains a career-ending decision for millions of well-educated and ambitious women.

对安倍晋三来说，更好地利用女性劳动力是最不可能的经济成果。那么，为什么要以如此胆怯和冷静的方式来解决这个问题呢？毕竟，制度化的性别歧视加剧了日本当今面临的许多最大挑战。例如，它恶化了日本的人口结构。对许多妇女来说，推迟生育是对社会期望的一种反抗，即生儿育女，成为家庭主妇。虽然情况正在改善，但对于数百万受过良好教育、雄心勃勃的女性来说，生孩子仍然是一个会影响职业生涯的决定。



An intriguing question is how much Abe learned from his first stint as prime minister from 2006 to 2007. Then, too, he talked of empowering women, but it was just that—talk. Many women still seethe over January 2007 comments by Abe’s then–health minister, Hakuo Yanagisawa, describing them as mere “baby-making machines.” Abe refused to fire Yanagisawa, assuring the nation that “I reprimanded him severely.” Even when Yanagisawa apologized he further displayed the cluelessness of Abe’s Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) by saying women were “people whose role it is to give birth.” What’s more, Abe’s 2006–2007 government defined “baby-making machines” as women between the ages of 15 and 50. That led many to wonder whether Japan was encouraging teenage girls to help increase Japan’s birthrate.

一个耐人寻味的问题是，安倍晋三从 2006 年至 2007 年首次担任首相期间学到了多少东西。当时，他也谈到了赋予女性权力，但这只是说说而已。2007 年 1 月，安倍晋三时任卫生大臣柳泽学夫（Hakuo Yanagisawa）称女性只是 "生孩子的机器"，许多女性至今仍对此耿耿于怀。安倍拒绝解雇柳泽，并向国民保证 "我严厉斥责了他"。即使柳泽道歉了，他还是说妇女是 "负责生育的人"，这进一步显示了安倍自民党的愚蠢。此外，安倍晋三的 2006-2007 年政府将 "生孩子机器 "定义为 15 至 50 岁的女性。这让很多人怀疑日本是否在鼓励少女帮助提高日本的出生率。



Sexist comments have long bedeviled Abe’s party. Take the July 2003 comments from former Prime Minister Yoshiro Mori that women who delay childbirth are selfish and shouldn’t be allowed to claim pensions. “Welfare is supposed to take care of and reward those women who have lots of children,” Mori said. “It is truly strange to say we have to use tax money to take care of women who don’t even give birth once, who grow old living their lives selfishly and singing the praises of freedom.” What of women who can’t conceive? And doesn’t living in a democracy mean having the right to choose whether to have kids?

长期以来，性别歧视言论一直困扰着安倍所在的政党。前首相森喜朗曾在 2003 年 7 月表示，推迟生育的女性是自私的，不应该被允许领取养老金。"森喜朗说："福利应该是照顾和奖励那些生了很多孩子的妇女。"如果说我们必须用税款来照顾那些甚至一次都不生育的妇女，而她们却自私地过着自己的生活，高唱自由的赞歌，这确实很奇怪"。不能怀孕的妇女怎么办？生活在民主社会不就意味着有权选择要不要孩子吗？



Around the same time, another member of Abe’s party, Seiichi Ota, was asked during a panel discussion about a recent gang rape of a young woman by students from some of Japan’s most prestigious universities. “Well, boys will be boys. At least gang rapists are still vigorous,” Ota said. “Isn’t that at least a little closer to normal?” The media maelstrom that followed brought condemnation from no less than then–Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi. He said: “Rape is an unforgivable, contemptible act. Being vigorous is a completely separate issue. Why would he make such a comment?”

大约在同一时间，安倍的另一名党员太田诚一在一次小组讨论中被问及最近日本几所最负盛名的大学的学生轮奸一名年轻女性的事件。他说："好吧，男孩就是男孩。至少轮奸犯还是有活力的，"太田说。"这不是至少更接近正常一点吗？随之而来的媒体漩涡引起了时任首相小泉纯一郎的谴责。他说：他说："强奸是不可饶恕、令人鄙视的行为。是否有活力是完全不同的问题。他为什么要发表这样的言论？



A few days later, Yasuo Fukuda, a future prime minister who then was Koizumi’s minister of charge of gender equality, shocked the nation further. Shukan Bunshun, a weekly magazine, reported that Fukuda said to reporters in an off-the-record briefing, “The problem is that there are lots of women dressed provocatively,” in comments shared with the magazine by those in attendance.

几天后，时任小泉性别平等担当大臣的未来首相福田康夫进一步震惊全国。据周刊《周刊文春》报道，福田在一次不公开的发布会上对记者说："问题在于有很多穿着暴露的女性。



Such comments make for more than embarrassing international news headlines. They also provide a window into the sexist mores of a party that’s run Japan almost without interruption since 1955. Did Mori, who is still a party kingpin, learn any lessons from his women-are-selfish rant? That’s doubtful when you consider his 2009 race against Mieko Tanaka, then a 33-year-old former secretary. Rather than speak to her proposed policies and criticisms of his representation of the people of Ishikawa Prefecture, Mori quipped, “She was picked only because she is young and has a nice body.” He implored voters not to be fooled by Tanaka’s “sexiness.”

这些言论不仅成为令人尴尬的国际新闻头条。它们还提供了一个窗口，让人们了解一个自 1955 年以来几乎从未间断过管理日本的政党的性别歧视风气。森喜朗现在仍然是党内的头号人物，他是否从自己的 "女性是自私的 "言论中吸取了教训？如果考虑到 2009 年他与田中美惠子的竞选，那就很值得怀疑了，田中美惠子当时还是一位 33 岁的前秘书。森喜朗没有谈及田中美惠子提出的政策和对他代表石川县人民的批评，而是调侃道："选她只是因为她年轻、身材好"。他恳请选民不要被田中的 "性感 "所迷惑。



Ironically, the few years preceding Mori’s ugly campaign against Tanaka, one he won by just a few thousand votes, were thought to be promising ones for Japanese women. That year, Tomoyo Nonaka was named chairwoman of Sanyo Electric Co. and Fumiko Hayashi became chief executive officer of retailer Daiei Inc. They were the first women to run major Japanese companies.

具有讽刺意味的是，在森喜朗以几千票险胜田中的丑陋竞选之前的几年，日本女性曾被认为是充满希望的几年。这一年，野中智洋被任命为三洋电机公司的董事长，林文子成为零售商大荣公司的首席执行官。她们是第一批掌管日本大型企业的女性。



But Nonaka lasted only 21 months; Hayashi was knocked back to vice chairwoman after two years in the top job.

但野中只坚持了 21 个月；林在担任最高职务两年后被打回副主席。



In 2005, for example, Koizumi’s landslide election victory was largely thanks to 43 seats secured by women. Yet the victory for gender equality was a somewhat Pyrrhic one. Koizumi had taken a page from Italy’s Silvio Berlusconi and recruited a handpicked bunch of fresh-faced and photogenic women—including a former beauty queen, a television anchor, and a celebrity chef—to dazzle voters. The media dubbed the candidates chosen for Koizumi’s cynical style-over-substance stunt everything from “Koizumi assassins” to “female ninjas” to the “babe brigade.”

例如，2005 年，小泉在选举中取得压倒性胜利，很大程度上要归功于女性获得的 43 个席位。然而，这场性别平等的胜利却有些岌岌可危。小泉向意大利的贝卢斯科尼学习，招募了一批面容清秀、上镜的女性--包括一位前选美皇后、一位电视主播和一位名厨--来吸引选民。媒体将为小泉这种玩世不恭的 "风格大于实质 "的噱头而挑选的候选人称为 "小泉刺客"、"女忍者 "和 "美女军团"。



Making it all the more cringe-worthy was Koizumi’s own history of sexist comments. One of the more publicized was that he expressed in January 2002 after Makiko Tanaka, Japan’s first female foreign minister, was sacked for reasons that struck many in the media as petty. When asked about tears Tanaka shed at the time, a patronizing Koizumi complained: “Tears are women’s greatest weapons. When women cry, men cannot compete with them.” After a public outcry, Koizumi doubled down on the parliament floor: “Everyone, not only me, has been saying it, even in novels. I myself am easily moved to tears.”

小泉自己也曾发表过性别歧视的言论，这更让人感到恶心。2002年1月，日本第一位女外相田中真纪子（Makiko Tanaka）被解职后，小泉发表的言论广为人知。当被问及田中当时流下的眼泪时，爱理不理的小泉抱怨道："眼泪是女人最大的武器。女人一哭，男人就无法与之抗衡"。在舆论哗然之后，小泉在国会上加倍辩解："不仅是我，每个人都在说，甚至在小说中也在说。我自己也很容易感动得流泪"。





In 2009, the Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) briefly wrested power away from the LDP with a similar strategy. Its own bevy of nubile fresh faces was dubbed the “Princess Corps.” Some in the media preferred to give credit to the architect of the DPJ’s beauty contest, party leader Ichiro Ozawa, and referred to them as “Ozawa Girls.” And it worked: A record 54 women won parliamentary seats in the August 30, 2009, election, a milestone for female representation in an economy notorious for little. The hope at the time was that the DPJ’s new prime minister, Yukio Hatoyama, would view women in less ornamental terms than the LDP’s leaders had. Sadly, that didn’t happen.

2009 年，日本民主党（DPJ）也采取了类似的策略，短暂地从自民党手中夺回了政权。民主党自己的一群青春靓丽的新面孔被称为 "公主军团"。一些媒体更愿意把功劳归于民主党选美比赛的策划者、党魁小泽一郎，称她们为 "小泽女孩"。这一招果然奏效：在 2009 年 8 月 30 日的选举中，创纪录的 54 名女性赢得了议会席位，这在女性代表人数很少的经济领域是一个里程碑。当时，人们希望民主党的新首相鸠山由纪夫能够像自民党领导人那样，不再以装饰性的眼光看待女性。遗憾的是，这并没有发生。



With the LDP back in power, the question is whether the latest pledges to empower women are real or mere lip service. It’s time for a national dialogue and decisive action. Women should take a page from Sandberg and demand equality. Japanese men must lean in, too. In a top-down society, the real push to end sexism must come from political and business leaders.

随着自民党重新掌权，问题在于最新的妇女赋权承诺是真实的，还是仅仅停留在口头上。现在是开展全国对话和采取果断行动的时候了。女性应该向桑德伯格学习，要求平等。日本男性也必须加入进来。在一个自上而下的社会中，真正推动结束性别歧视的力量必须来自政治和商业领袖。



“To change things in society, you do need to put change agents in leadership positions,” Matsui said. “Women need to fight harder, too, but this problem is so ingrained in Japanese culture, corporate etiquette and what the broader society expects from women and how women themselves have internalized those norms. As much as women need to demand change, men also need to fight on their end.”

"Matsui 说："要想改变社会，就必须让变革者担任领导职务。"女性也需要更加努力地奋斗，但这个问题在日本文化、企业礼仪和整个社会对女性的期望中根深蒂固，女性自身也已将这些规范内化。女性需要要求改变，男性也需要为自己而战。



Matsui crams this laugh-line into every speech she gives about Womenomics: “There is no such thing as a glass ceiling; it’s just a thick layer of men.” All joking aside, Japan has some of the most-impervious barriers for women in the developed world. Abe boosters, including many women, like to think he is preparing to break through that barrier once and for all. The trouble is, while women in American and Europe face a glass ceiling, their Japanese counterparts face one closer to concrete.

松井在每次关于妇女经济学的演讲中都会加入这样的笑料："根本就没有玻璃天花板这回事，它只是一层厚厚的男人。玩笑归玩笑，在发达国家中，日本女性面临的障碍是最难以逾越的。安倍晋三的支持者，包括许多女性，都认为他准备一劳永逸地突破这一障碍。问题是，美国和欧洲的女性面临的是玻璃天花板，而日本女性面临的则是更接近混凝土的天花板。



“Japan has some very, very smart, international and thoughtful women,” said John Wood, founder of Room to Read, a nonprofit literacy organization. “Why it doesn’t use that resource better is astounding to me.”

"非营利性扫盲组织 Room to Read 的创始人约翰-伍德（John Wood）说："日本有一些非常非常聪明、国际化和有思想的女性。"非营利性扫盲组织 Room to Read 的创始人约翰-伍德说："为什么日本不更好地利用这一资源，这让我感到震惊。



The world can learn from Japan’s warped gender policies. Matsui’s research dovetails with the findings of the World Bank, IMF, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, and the World Economic Forum: Educating women is good for the economy and for business. “The plusses for societies and economies have become obvious,” Matsui said. “Educated women contribute to the quality, size, and productivity of workforces. They can get better paying jobs, allowing them to provide daily necessities, health care, and education to support the family. Our research shows that investments in female education can yield a ‘growth premium’ in GDP trends and that narrowing the gender gap boosts per capita income.”

全世界都可以从日本扭曲的性别政策中吸取教训。松井的研究与世界银行、国际货币基金组织、经济合作与发展组织和世界经济论坛的研究结果不谋而合：女性教育有利于经济和商业发展。"对社会和经济的好处显而易见，"Matsui 说。"受过教育的女性有助于提高劳动力的质量、规模和生产率。她们可以获得收入更高的工作，从而有能力提供日常必需品、医疗保健和教育，以养家糊口。我们的研究表明，对女性教育的投资可以在国内生产总值趋势中产生'增长溢价'，缩小性别差距可以提高人均收入。



To Matsui, it’s a no-brainer. At a time in history fraught with war, inequality, poverty, hunger, and disease, education is one of the clear “silver bullets” that can appreciably raise living standards broadly and consistently. Why, then, must so many girls and women across societies still fight to gain access to secondary and tertiary education? Why is the gender gap, both in terms of access to learning and the workplace, still so wide?

对松井来说，这是毋庸置疑的。在充满战争、不平等、贫困、饥饿和疾病的历史时期，教育显然是一种 "银弹"，可以广泛而持续地显著提高生活水平。那么，为什么各个社会中仍有如此多的女孩和妇女为获得中等和高等教育而奋斗？为什么在学习和就业方面的性别差距仍然如此之大？



Since 2005, Matsui has had a front-row seat to this stubborn phenomenon as co-chair of the Asian University for Women’s Support Group in Japan. “These hurdles can be rooted in culture, history, or legacy, as well as poverty,” she said. “They are unique to each society and community. The only way to get people to change their mores and customs is by getting them to see the benefits.”

自 2005 年以来，Matsui 作为日本亚洲妇女大学支持小组的联合主席，一直在前排观看这一顽固现象。"她说："这些障碍可能源于文化、历史或传统，也可能源于贫困。"每个社会和社区都有其独特性。让人们改变风俗习惯的唯一办法就是让他们看到这样做的好处"。





Japan’s experience is instructive. Nearly 70 percent of working women in Japan quit after having their first child. This tendency, rooted as much in economics as tradition, is a major cause of Japan’s running-a-marathon-with-one-leg problem. But similar handicaps hurt developing economies in Asia, where women and girls can face great hardship gaining access to education and, therefore, are relegated to unskilled, low-paying jobs. “In addition to reducing their chances for a better life, their lack of education costs their country in terms of lost economic growth,” Matsui said.

日本的经验很有启发性。日本近 70% 的职业女性在生完第一个孩子后就辞职了。这种倾向既源于经济，也源于传统，是造成日本 "一条腿跑马拉松 "问题的主要原因。但类似的障碍也损害了亚洲的发展中经济体，那里的妇女和女孩在接受教育方面可能面临巨大困难，因此只能从事非技术性的低薪工作。"松井说："除了减少她们过上更好生活的机会外，她们缺乏教育还使国家失去了经济增长。



For the BRIC nations (Brazil, Russia, India, and China) and the so-called Next-11 countries (Bangladesh, Egypt, Indonesia, Iran, Korea, Mexico, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Turkey, and Vietnam), increased investment in female education and training would raise GDP growth by about 0.2 percent per year, Goldman Sachs estimates. What’s more, a narrower gender gap could add 20 percent to income per capita by 2030. If only governments the world over championed the issue.

据高盛估计，对于金砖四国（巴西、俄罗斯、印度和中国）和所谓的下十一国（孟加拉国、埃及、印度尼西亚、伊朗、韩国、墨西哥、尼日利亚、巴基斯坦、菲律宾、土耳其和越南）而言，增加对女性教育和培训的投资将使国内生产总值每年增长约 0.2%。更重要的是，到 2030 年，缩小性别差距可使人均收入增加 20%。只要世界各国政府都能支持这一问题。



“Despite the business case for recruiting and developing more women, 70 percent of the executives we surveyed in Asia said greater gender diversity was not a strategic priority for their companies—that is, it was not among their top ten priorities,” wrote McKinsey analysts Claudia Suessmuth Dyckerhoff, Jin Wang, and Josephine Chen. “In Europe, the figure was 47 percent. In addition, only a minority of Asian executives—some 40 percent—expected that their companies would step up efforts to improve gender diversity in the next five years.”

"麦肯锡分析师 Claudia Suessmuth Dyckerhoff、Jin Wang 和 Josephine Chen 写道："尽管招聘和培养更多女性在商业上是可行的，但在我们调查的亚洲企业高管中，70% 的人表示，提高性别多样性并不是他们公司的战略重点，也就是说，这并不是他们的十大优先事项之一。"在欧洲，这一比例为 47%。此外，只有少数亚洲高管--约 40%--预计他们的公司将在未来五年内加大力度改善性别多样性。



“South Korean executives were a notable exception: Two-thirds foresaw the rapid introduction of more gender diversity initiatives,” they wrote.

"韩国高管是一个明显的例外：他们写道："三分之二的高管预计将迅速推出更多的性别多元化举措。



These findings suggest that the status quo is not about to alter greatly. A minority of executives see the need for change and are trying hard to get more women on their teams, but the majority are still not giving the issue much attention. Moreover, given how few women have reached the top, the question arises of whether change is afoot even in those markets and companies where there appears to be wider awareness of the importance of gender diversity.

这些调查结果表明，现状不会有大的改变。少数高管认为有必要进行变革，并正在努力让更多的女性加入他们的团队，但大多数高管仍然不太重视这个问题。此外，鉴于进入高层的女性寥寥无几，人们不禁要问，即使在那些似乎对性别多元化的重要性有了更广泛认识的市场和公司中，是否也正在发生变化。





Japan’s modern history is replete with flashes of feminist energy, but few have caught on in a cohesive, sustained, and formidable way. A little Gloria Steinem–style agitation, or even taking a page from Lysistrata, would go a long way in a nation badly in need of an economic shakeup. After all, those in power don’t tend to yield it easily, least of all Japan’s old-boys club. Here, it’s worth pausing to consider the person most responsible for the rights women in Japan do enjoy. Ironically, it’s a gaijin named Beate Sirota Gordon.

在日本的现代史上，女权主义的活力层出不穷，但很少有女权主义能够以一种有凝聚力的、持续的和强大的方式流行开来。对于一个急需经济动荡的国家来说，一点格洛丽亚-斯泰纳姆（Gloria Steinem）式的鼓动，甚至借鉴莱西斯特拉塔（Lysistrata）的经验，都将大有裨益。毕竟，当权者不会轻易屈服，尤其是日本的老男孩俱乐部。在此，我们不妨静下心来思考一下，日本妇女享有这些权利的最大责任人是谁。具有讽刺意味的是，这个人就是外籍人士贝亚特-西罗塔-戈登（Beate Sirota Gordon）。



Beate Sirota was born in Vienna on October 25, 1923, to Russian-Jewish parents and later married American Joseph Gordon. Her father, Leo Sirota, was a celebrated pianist who in 1929 took an offer to teach in Tokyo. There, Gordon saw firsthand how few rights women had—they were merely property. A decade later, in 1939, she migrated to Oakland, California, to attend Mills College, where she received a degree in modern languages and eventually became a naturalized U.S. citizen before returning to Tokyo in 1945, just months after Japan’s surrender.

贝亚特-西罗塔 1923 年 10 月 25 日出生于维也纳，父母是俄罗斯犹太人，后来嫁给了美国人约瑟夫-戈登。她的父亲利奥-西罗塔是一位著名的钢琴家，1929 年应聘到东京教书。在那里，戈登亲眼目睹了妇女的权利是多么渺小--她们只是财产。十年后的 1939 年，她移居到加利福尼亚州奥克兰市，就读于米尔斯学院，在那里她获得了现代语言学位，并最终入籍美国，1945 年日本投降后几个月返回东京。



Gordon—fluent in Japanese, English, French, German, and Russian—was hired by General Douglas MacArthur’s occupation army as a translator. MacArthur’s team was just beginning to craft Japan’s postwar constitution. As its lone female member, Gordon was given an opportunity for which Japan’s female masses owe her considerable gratitude: Draft its women’s-rights section. It was a highly unlikely job for a 22-year-old who was neither a constitutional scholar nor lawyer. But there was a certain random genius to entrusting the task to a feisty, observant, and independent woman. She saw to it that her all-important Article 14 made it into the final document. It stated, in terms that in 1946 Japan were nothing short of revolutionary: “All of the people are equal under the law and there shall be no discrimination in political, economic or social relations because of race, creed, sex, social status or family origin.”

戈登精通日语、英语、法语、德语和俄语，被道格拉斯-麦克阿瑟将军的占领军聘为翻译。当时，麦克阿瑟的团队刚刚开始制定日本的战后宪法。作为团队中唯一的女性成员，戈登获得了一个机会，日本的女性群众对她感激不尽：起草妇女权利部分。对于一个既不是宪法学者也不是律师的 22 岁年轻人来说，这是个极不可能的工作。但是，把这项任务交给一位性格活泼、善于观察、独立自主的女性，却有一种随机应变的天分。在她的努力下，最重要的第 14 条被写入了最终文件。它以在 1946 年的日本堪称革命性的措辞指出："法律面前人人平等，在政治、经济和社会关系中不得因种族、信仰、性别、社会地位或家庭出身而有所歧视。



For generations, Gordon stayed out of the limelight. She feared, for example, that the conservative men running postwar Japan would exploit her youth and inexperience to revise the constitution. Many of the Japanese negotiators who worked with MacArthur, after all, hated Article 14 more than all the others. In the 1950s, she joined the Asia Society in New York, where she had an illustrious career focusing on the performing arts. In the decades that followed, Gordon became more vocal about her days in MacArthur’s Tokyo. In the mid-1990s, she took to the international speaking circuit to promote her memoir, The Only Woman in the Room.

几代人以来，戈登都没有出现在人们的视线中。例如，她担心战后管理日本的保守派会利用她的年轻和缺乏经验来修改宪法。毕竟，许多与麦克阿瑟共事过的日本谈判代表对第 14 条的憎恨超过了其他所有条款。20 世纪 50 年代，她加入了纽约的亚洲协会，并在那里专注于表演艺术，取得了辉煌的成就。在随后的几十年里，戈登对她在麦克阿瑟东京的日子更加耿耿于怀。20 世纪 90 年代中期，她开始在国际巡回演讲，宣传她的回忆录《房间里唯一的女人》。



Sadly, few Japanese women knew much about Gordon. She died on December 30, 2013, at age 89, in New York. That’s a shame, considering how much they owe her for the freedoms they enjoy. It’s time for Japanese to take up the flame of a woman some consider their answer to Gloria Steinem. Nearly 70 years after Japan’s constitution was written, sexism remains rampant. Such inequality holds back Japan’s economy by reducing the quality of its labor force. Women must demand their due. One problem is a dearth of role models. In fact, that’s one of lawmaker Kuniko Inoguchi’s biggest complaints about where modern Japan finds itself. “In this country, we have never had a real radical feminist movement like many countries have,” she said. “Lacking that, I think we have not been able to make a dramatic change in mind-set.”

遗憾的是，很少有日本女性了解戈登。她于 2013 年 12 月 30 日在纽约去世，享年 89 岁。考虑到日本人享有的自由要归功于她，这实在令人遗憾。现在是时候让日本人继承这位被一些人视为格洛丽亚-斯坦纳姆（Gloria Steinem）的女性的遗志了。在日本宪法制定近 70 年后的今天，性别歧视依然猖獗。这种不平等降低了劳动力的素质，从而阻碍了日本经济的发展。妇女必须要求获得应有的权利。一个问题是缺乏榜样。事实上，这也是立法者猪口邦子（Kuniko Inoguchi）对现代日本最大的不满之一。"她说："在这个国家，我们从未像许多国家那样开展过真正激进的女权运动。"由于缺乏这种运动，我认为我们无法在思想观念上实现巨大的转变。





I will never forget the first time I met Inoguchi. It was in October 2007 at Tokyo’s swanky Prince Hotel, where Inoguchi was speaking at the Symposium on Women in Financial Services sponsored by the American Chamber of Commerce in Japan. As I arrived, dozens of conservatively dressed businesswomen were chatting in the lobby about the need to raise the profile of women in corporate Japan. Things took a surreal turn as a parade of tall, scantily clad beauty queens suddenly made their way past toward their own gathering: tryouts for the Miss International pageant. The hotel’s planners seemed to miss the irony of placing the two events—one celebrating women’s brains, the other their sex appeal and tan lines—side by side.

我永远不会忘记第一次见到猪口邦子的情景。那是 2007 年 10 月，在东京豪华的王子饭店，猪口邦子正在日本美国商会主办的金融服务女性研讨会上发表演讲。我到达时，几十位衣着保守的女企业家正在大厅里聊天，谈论提高日本企业界女性形象的必要性。就在这时，一群身材高挑、衣着暴露的选美皇后突然从她们身边走过，开始了她们自己的聚会：国际小姐选美比赛。酒店的策划者似乎没有意识到，把这两个活动--一个是赞美女性的智慧，另一个是赞美女性的性感和晒黑的皮肤--放在一起是一种讽刺。



It was as apt a metaphor for what many women experience in Japan, where the desire to be taken seriously collides with those in the executive suite who still see women as ornaments to a business culture ruled by men in gray suits. Along with rolling her eyes at the state of affairs in Japan Inc., Inoguchi is among those in power rolling up their sleeves to remove one of the most-enduring obstacles to faster growth.

在日本，人们渴望被重视，而那些高管却仍然把女性视为灰色西装男性统治下的商业文化的装饰品。除了对日本公司的现状翻白眼之外，猪口也是那些卷起袖子，为加快发展扫除最持久障碍的当权者之一。



She served as Koizumi’s gender affairs minister in 2005 and 2006 until Abe took over as prime minister the first time around and promptly ignored the issue. The persistence of Japan’s seniority-based management system and what Inoguchi calls its “paternalistic nature” means that for every woman who rises into management, there are scores with little prospect of doing so. But Inoguchi worries, too, that women lack role models. It pains her that, just as in 2007, Forbes magazine’s 2013 ranking of the world’s 100 most powerful women doesn’t list a single Japanese. Among Asians, the rankings include Burmese, Chinese, Hong Kongers, Indians, Indonesians, Singaporeans, South Koreans, and Taiwanese, but no Japanese.

2005 年和 2006 年，她曾担任小泉的性别事务大臣，直到安倍晋三首次接任首相，并迅速忽视了这个问题。日本长期以来实行的论资排辈的管理制度以及猪口所说的 "家长式作风 "意味着，每有一位女性晋升到管理层，就会有更多的女性无望晋升到管理层。但猪口也担心女性缺乏榜样。令她感到痛心的是，与 2007 年一样，《福布斯》杂志 2013 年全球最有权势女性 100 强排名中没有一位日本人上榜。在亚洲人中，排名包括缅甸人、中国人、香港人、印度人、印度尼西亚人、新加坡人、韩国人和台湾人，但没有日本人。



In 2007, I asked Inoguchi about one female role model, named Riyo Mori, who had just won the Miss Universe contest. She was suddenly the most famous woman in Japan and hit the speaking circuit to encourage young Japanese women to follow in her footsteps, arguing, incongruously, that beauty contests were about female empowerment, not skimpy swimsuits. Inoguchi was among those wincing at the spectacle and arguing that the economy would benefit far more from young women striving to be Japan’s answer to Germany’s Angela Merkel, America’s Hillary Clinton, or India’s Sonia Gandhi. Great talent exists among Japan’s female masses. The nation just needs to give women the chance to display it.

2007 年，我向猪口询问了一位女性榜样的情况，她叫森里洋，刚刚赢得了环球小姐大赛的冠军。她突然成了日本最有名的女性，并在巡回演讲中鼓励日本年轻女性追随她的脚步。猪口邦子和其他一些人一样对这一场面感到恼火，并认为如果年轻女性努力成为德国的安吉拉-默克尔、美国的希拉里-克林顿或印度的索尼娅-甘地，那么日本的经济将会受益更多。日本女性群众中存在着巨大的才能。国家只需要为女性提供施展才华的机会。



Here, Caroline Kennedy could be an intriguing wild card. The daughter of former President John F. Kennedy is the first woman to represent the United States in Japan, and she arrived in Tokyo at a most propitious moment: just as Abe is pledging to empower women and elevate more of them into leadership roles. Kennedy isn’t the ideal feminist role model. For one thing, her knowledge of Japan, is, at best, superficial. For another, as the scion of America’s most-enduring political dynasty, it isn’t as if she struggled to get where she is. Yet having a woman (and a mother of three) play such a high-profile role in Japan will turn heads not only in the halls of Parliament but also the shopping byways of Ginza.

卡罗琳-肯尼迪（Caroline Kennedy）可能会成为一张引人入胜的 "外卡"。这位前总统约翰-肯尼迪（John F. Kennedy）的女儿是第一位在日本代表美国的女性，她抵达东京的时机非常有利：安倍晋三正承诺赋予女性权力，让更多女性担任领导职务。肯尼迪并不是理想的女权主义者榜样。首先，她对日本的了解充其量只能算肤浅。其次，作为美国最持久的政治王朝的后裔，她并不是通过奋斗才取得今天的成就。然而，让一位女性（三个孩子的母亲）在日本扮演如此高调的角色，不仅会在国会大厅，也会在银座的购物大街上引起人们的注意。



That isn’t the storyline you hear from some foreign-policy aficionados. Many see the White House choosing to reward a big fundraiser and early backer of Obama’s presidential campaign as a misguided and cynical move. Kennedy, many say, is a debutante without diplomatic experience. She doesn’t know Tokyo. And she’s no Edwin Reischauer, ambassador under her father in the 1960s. Yes, there are challenges facing U.S.–Japan relations—including American bases in Okinawa, and risks such as Japan’s territorial disputes with China. But in the age of instantaneous communication, 24/7 news cycles, and encryption technology, it’s not as if ambassadors make big decisions anymore. And for all the hype in the media, Abe and Obama have few major policy disagreements.

你从一些外交政策爱好者那里听到的故事情节并非如此。许多人认为，白宫选择奖励一位大筹款人和奥巴马总统竞选的早期支持者是一种误导和玩世不恭的举动。许多人说，肯尼迪是一个没有外交经验的名媛。她不了解东京。她也不是埃德温-赖肖尔（Edwin Reischauer），上世纪六十年代她父亲手下的大使。是的，美日关系面临着挑战--包括美国在冲绳的基地，以及日本与中国的领土争端等风险。但在瞬时通讯、全天候新闻报道和加密技术盛行的时代，大使已经不再能做出重大决定了。尽管媒体大肆炒作，但安倍和奥巴马在政策上几乎没有重大分歧。



Many Japanese couldn’t be happier that a trusted Obama confidante is coming their way—even better, a famous one. While Kennedy’s predecessor, John Roos, did a fine job, he’s not exactly a household name. Camelot meeting the Chrysanthemum Throne is big news in a nation that’s been feeling a bit unappreciated by the West as China hogs the spotlight. Kennedy would be wise to understand the import of her arrival at what could be a crucial moment in gender dynamics. Kennedy should take every opportunity she gets—and even create a few—to inspire women to break through that thick layer of Japanese men.

许多日本人都非常高兴，因为奥巴马的一位可信赖的红颜知己即将出现在他们面前，而且还是一位名人。虽然肯尼迪的前任约翰-罗斯工作出色，但他并不是家喻户晓的人物。卡米洛特与菊花宝座的会面，对于一个因中国占据聚光灯而感到有点不受西方重视的国家来说是个大新闻。肯尼迪应该明智地认识到，在性别动态的关键时刻，她的到来意义重大。肯尼迪应该抓住一切机会--甚至创造一些机会--激励女性冲破日本男性厚厚的保护层。



Among Japanese women trying to do just that is Rina Bovrisse. The 40-year-old has become a minor celebrity for her widely publicized discrimination lawsuit against Prada and being the first Japanese of her gender to bring her case before the United Nations. I first met the single mom in September 2010, several months after she shocked the famed fashion house with a sexual harassment suit and a blizzard of embarrassing headlines. After all, Bovrisse contended Prada fired her for being “ugly.”

Rina Bovrisse 就是日本女性中的一位。现年 40 岁的她因起诉 Prada 歧视案而小有名气，并成为第一位将自己的案件提交联合国的日本女性。我第一次见到这位单身母亲是在 2010 年 9 月，那是在她因性骚扰诉讼和一系列令人尴尬的头条新闻震惊了这家著名的时装品牌几个月之后。毕竟，Bovrisse 认为普拉达解雇她的原因是 "丑陋"。



When we met in Shibuya, Mecca for the nation’s fashionable youth, to go over her story, Bovrisse presented me with a business card identifying her as a “Fashionista Feminista.” Fashion, of course, is an industry that prides itself on empowering women. And when you think about fashion brands committed to doing just that, Prada probably earns a spot near the top of most lists. It was a dream come true in April 2009 when Bovrisse was hired as a senior retail manager.

当我们在全国时尚青年的圣地涩谷见面，了解她的故事时，Bovrisse 向我展示了一张名片，上面写着她是 "时尚女权主义者"。当然，时尚是一个以赋予女性权力为荣的行业。当你想到致力于此的时尚品牌时，普拉达可能会在大多数榜单中名列前茅。2009 年 4 月，当 Bovrisse 被聘为高级零售经理时，她的梦想成真了。



The dream faded into nightmare territory: Bovrisse claims she was harassed by Prada Japan’s top executive for her appearance, age, and weight and unfairly dismissed, claims Prada denies. Rather than slink away, Bovrisse, a 20-year fashion-industry veteran, sued Prada and turned to the local and international media. Her case might garner modest attention in Milan, New York, or Paris, where sexual-harassment battles are commonplace. Coming in Japan, where women’s rights are often a novel idea, it was a shocking spectacle. Japanese women are supposed to maintain a stiff upper lip when being mistreated in the workplace: That’s how it is. Deal with it. Bovrisse was having none of that, and good for her. In her frustration, she’s doing her part to highlight a major cause of Japan’s malaise: a chronic disregard for the female workforce. It hinders growth, adds to public debt, reduces competitiveness, and feeds other challenges like the nation’s falling birthrate. “So many smart, driven, talented Japanese women are tired of not being treated equally,” Bovrisse said. “I am speaking out for them. We must have the courage to demand to be treated fairly.”

梦境渐渐变成了噩梦：Bovrisse 声称自己因外貌、年龄和体重受到 Prada 日本公司高层的骚扰，并被不公平地解雇，Prada 对此予以否认。作为一名在时装界工作了 20 年的资深人士，Bovrisse 没有选择逃避，而是起诉了 Prada，并求助于当地和国际媒体。在米兰、纽约或巴黎，性骚扰之争司空见惯，她的案件可能不会引起太多关注。但在日本，女权往往是一个新奇的概念，因此这起案件令人震惊。日本女性在工作场所受到虐待时，理应保持沉默：事情就是这样。面对现实吧。波弗瑞丝对此毫无反应，这对她来说是件好事。在她的挫败感中，她正在尽自己的一份力量强调日本萎靡不振的一个主要原因：对女性劳动力的长期漠视。这阻碍了经济增长，增加了公共债务，降低了竞争力，并加剧了国家出生率下降等其他挑战。"博弗里斯说："许多聪明、有干劲、有才华的日本女性厌倦了不被平等对待。"我为她们大声疾呼。我们必须有勇气要求得到公平对待。



After studying at Parsons School of Design, Bovrisse (the name comes from her marriage to a Frenchman) had worked in New York, London, Paris, and Hawaii and for household names like Prada USA and Chanel SA. Presumably, it was that résumé that prompted Prada Japan to hire Bovrisse to oversee 500 employees in 40 shops. And then, she said, the trouble began. First, she was told to get rid of 15 managers and assistant managers for being “old, fat, ugly, disgusting, or not having the Prada look.” Later in her six-month stint there, she claims to have been told to lose weight and change her hairstyle. Bovrisse says she complained to company headquarters in Milan and was fired soon after. In August 2012, representatives from the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women met with Bovrisse, sharing the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development’s worries about the level of female empowerment in Japan.

在帕森斯设计学院（Parsons School of Design）学习之后，Bovrisse（这个名字源于她与一位法国人的婚姻）曾在纽约、伦敦、巴黎和夏威夷工作过，并为美国普拉达（Prada USA）和香奈儿（Chanel SA）等家喻户晓的品牌工作过。据推测，正是这份履历促使 Prada 日本公司聘请 Bovrisse 负责管理 40 家店铺的 500 名员工。然后，她说，麻烦开始了。首先，她被要求辞退 15 名经理和副经理，理由是 "老、胖、丑、恶心，或者没有普拉达的风格"。后来，在六个月的工作中，她又被要求减肥和改变发型。Bovrisse 说她向米兰的公司总部投诉，不久就被解雇了。2012 年 8 月，联合国消除对妇女歧视委员会的代表与 Bovrisse 会晤，分享了经济合作与发展组织对日本女性赋权水平的担忧。



Not surprisingly for Japan, Bovrisse’s case was dismissed. But what was surprising was the sexist statement accompanying the October 26, 2012, Tokyo District Court decision, and by a female judge: “Sexual harassment and discrimination is confirmed, but legal for the fashion industry,” Judge Reiko Morioka wrote, adding that “if a female employee’s salary is high, the emotional distress of sexual harassment should be endured.” In other words, grow a backbone, Bovrisse-san, will you?

对于日本来说，博弗里斯的案件被驳回并不奇怪。但令人惊讶的是，东京地方法院 2012 年 10 月 26 日的判决附带的性别歧视声明，而且是由一位女法官撰写的："森冈玲子法官写道："性骚扰和歧视已被证实，但对时尚行业来说是合法的。"她还说："如果女性员工的薪水很高，就应该忍受性骚扰带来的精神痛苦。换句话说，长点骨气吧，Bovrisse 先生，好吗？



If Prada Japan thought that countersuing Bovrisse for $780,000 (less than what she was seeking in damages) would shut her up, the company was gravely mistaken. Since then, she’s spoken all over Japan and the globe about gender inequality in Japan, been feted as a crusading heroine in Elle magazine and British Vogue and named “Female Icon of the Year” alongside Michelle Obama and Carla Bruni by Portuguese newspaper Correio da Manhã. Bovrisse also basked in the glow of Internet activists flooding social media spaces, including Prada’s Facebook page, with statements of support and calls to arms. Her case has even warranted its own Wikipedia page. Bovrisse has addressed Hong Kong’s Legislative Council and been tapped by the American Chamber of Commerce in Japan in 2013 to become a spokesperson for its global gender initiatives.

如果日本普拉达公司认为以 78 万美元（少于她要求的赔偿金额）反诉 Bovrisse 就能让她闭嘴，那就大错特错了。从那以后，她在日本和全球各地就日本的性别不平等问题发表了演讲，被《Elle》杂志和英国《Vogue》杂志誉为巾帼英雄，并与米歇尔-奥巴马和卡拉-布鲁尼一起被葡萄牙报纸《Correio da Manhã》评为 "年度女性偶像"。Bovrisse 还沉浸在网络活动家的光芒之中，社交媒体（包括 Prada 的 Facebook 页面）上充斥着支持她的声明和号召。她的案件甚至在维基百科上有了自己的页面。Bovrisse 曾在香港立法会发表演讲，并于 2013 年被日本美国商会选为其全球性别倡议的发言人。



But in May 2013 came her biggest coup: the UN’s blessing. The LDP greybeards who run Japan couldn’t have been happy to read this from the world body’s Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights:

但在 2013 年 5 月，她迎来了最大的政变：联合国的祝福。从联合国人权事务高级专员办事处（OHCHR）那里得知这一消息后，掌管日本的自民党灰头土脸的家伙们肯定不会高兴：



The Committee urges the State party to introduce in its legislation an offence of sexual harassment, in particular in the workplace, which carries sanctions proportionate to the severity of the offence. The Committee also recommends that the State party ensure that victims can lodge complaints without fear of retaliation. The Committee recommends that the State party continue to raise the public awareness against sexual harassment.

委员会敦促缔约国在立法中规定性骚扰为犯罪行为，特别是在工作场所，并根据罪行的严重程度给予相应的制裁。委员会还建议缔约国确保受害者可以提出申诉而不必担心报复。委员会建议缔约国继续提高公众对性骚扰的认识。





Japan’s per-capita-income rankings tend to be a mirror image of those reflecting women’s participation in politics and corporate management. Women also have fared poorly since the Lehman shock of late 2008, being hit disproportionately by Wall Street’s meltdown. Because many are hired on part-time contracts, they are easiest to cut when corporate profits evaporate. Japan’s seniority-based and male-dominated model has built bridges, dams, and roads to nowhere and cut interest rates to zero in a bid to raise living standards. It’s dragged its feet on better harnessing the talents of its female masses.

日本的人均收入排名往往是女性参与政治和企业管理的镜像。自 2008 年末的雷曼冲击以来，女性的表现也不尽如人意，受到华尔街崩溃的打击尤为严重。由于许多女性都是兼职合同工，因此当企业利润蒸发时，她们最容易被裁员。日本以资历为基础、男性占主导地位的模式修建了桥梁、水坝和不通路，并将利率降至零，以提高生活水平。在更好地利用女性群众的才能方面，日本却拖了后腿。



“It pains me to think women haven’t come further than this,” Bovrisse said. Japan needs more Bovrisses to step forward and, in the Sandbergian sense, lean in. If Japanese women are waiting for their male leaders to champion their cause, they’re mistaken. They need to demand a bigger say in Japan’s business and political systems if they want true change. It’s a key to Japan becoming a meritocracy. Societal norms are a powerful dynamic and they’re sometimes summed up with a proverb: The nail that sticks up gets hammered down. Cases of sexism often don’t get reported for fear of making waves or being at the center of a potential scandal. Yet women should make waves, and big ones. Gender discrimination in Japan often seems like one of those unfixable issues. When you talk about it, people nod knowingly and shrug.

"Bovrisse 说："想到女性还没有走得比这更远，我就感到痛心。日本需要更多的 Bovrisses 站出来，用桑德伯格的话来说，就是靠过来。如果日本女性还在等待男性领导人来支持她们的事业，那就大错特错了。如果她们想要真正的改变，就必须要求在日本的商业和政治体系中有更大的发言权。这是日本成为任人唯贤国家的关键所在。社会规范是一种强大的动力，有时可以用一句谚语来概括：钉子往上钉，钉子往下砸。性别歧视的案例通常不会被报道，因为害怕引起轩然大波或成为潜在丑闻的中心。然而，女性应该掀起波澜，而且是大波澜。在日本，性别歧视似乎是一个无法解决的问题。当你谈起这个问题时，人们会心领神会地点点头，然后耸耸肩。



Job applicants in Japan find nothing odd about attaching a photo to their résumés, or including their date of birth. There’s little outcry when the response of Tokyo subway operators to complaints about groping on trains is segregation: women-only cars. Just like the economy, it’s a matter of treating the symptoms of the problem, not the underlying illness.

在日本，求职者对在简历中附上照片或注明出生日期并不感到奇怪。当东京地铁运营商对有关在列车上被摸的投诉的回应是隔离：女性专用车厢时，几乎没有人对此表示不满。就像经济一样，这是一个治标不治本的问题。



The literary and cinematic worlds tell us The Devil Wears Prada. In Bovrisse’s story, you could say Prada wears the devil. Yet, as even our heroine will admit, this tale is much bigger than the experience of one woman. It’s about the future of the third-biggest economy. And grudgingly, Bovrisse is sensing her Gloria Steinem–like role in Japan’s economic drama.

文学界和电影界都在向我们讲述《穿普拉达的女魔头》（The Devil Wears Prada）。在 Bovrisse 的故事中，你可以说 Prada 穿上了魔鬼。然而，就像我们的女主人公也承认的那样，这个故事远不止一个女人的经历那么简单。它关系到第三大经济体的未来。博弗里斯勉为其难地意识到，她在日本经济大戏中扮演了格洛丽亚-斯坦因式的角色。





As other nations in Asia develop and spread their wings, they would be wise to heed Japan’s cautionary tale. Of course, the Asia region is a paradoxical one when it comes to the role of women. Take Korea, a promising economy that does even worse than Japan in gender-equality measures. Even so, Korea already has what America, never mind Japan, doesn’t: a female leader.

亚洲其他国家在发展壮大的同时，最好也听听日本的警示。当然，在女性角色方面，亚洲地区是一个自相矛盾的地区。以韩国为例，这个充满希望的经济体在性别平等方面的表现甚至不如日本。即便如此，韩国已经拥有了美国，更不用说日本所没有的：一位女性领导人。



The reason is that Asia is known more for patriarchal succession than gender equality. Asia leads the world in the number of years women have ruled. For all the excitement about Hillary Clinton perhaps running for U.S. president in 2016, female leaders are old-hat in Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Pakistan, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand, and, now, Korea with President Park Geun-hye. Soong Ching Ling led China briefly on more than one occasion and, while she never took office, Aung San Suu Kyi was elected leader of Myanmar in 1990.

原因在于亚洲以父权继承而非性别平等著称。亚洲女性执政的年数居世界首位。尽管希拉里-克林顿（Hillary Clinton）可能会在 2016 年竞选美国总统，但在孟加拉国、印度、印度尼西亚、巴基斯坦、菲律宾、斯里兰卡、泰国，以及现在的韩国总统朴槿惠（Park Geun-hye）那里，女性领导人已经是老皇历了。宋庆龄不止一次短暂地领导过中国，昂山素季虽然从未就职，但她在 1990 年当选为缅甸领导人。



It is supremely puzzling, then, that Asia also is way up there among the world leaders in gender discrimination, all at the price of growth. The United Nations reckons that limiting female employment costs Asia $89 billion a year in lost output. A region struggling to raise many of its three billion people out of poverty squanders roughly the annual gross domestic product of Slovakia because it favors men. How silly is that?

令人费解的是，亚洲在性别歧视方面也是世界领先的，而这一切都是以增长为代价的。联合国估计，限制女性就业使亚洲每年损失 890 亿美元的产出。一个正在努力使其 30 亿人口中的许多人摆脱贫困的地区，因为偏爱男性而浪费了大约相当于斯洛伐克的年国内生产总值。这有多愚蠢？



“Economic development correlates positively with gender equality,” says Astrid Tuminez, vice dean of the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy at the National University of Singapore.

"新加坡国立大学李光耀公共政策学院副院长 Astrid Tuminez 说："经济发展与性别平等呈正相关。



Korea’s President Park should immediately work to narrow a male–female pay gap that is the worst among OECD members—39 percent in 2010, more than double the OECD average of 15 percent. The World Economic Forum ranks South Korea 111th in gender equality, trailing Suriname, United Arab Emirates, and Albania. In China and India, of course, the challenge for women is being born at all. A cultural preference for boys and scientific advances increasing the number of sex-selection abortions are causing dangerous demographic imbalances.

韩国总统朴槿惠应该立即努力缩小经合组织成员国中最严重的男女薪酬差距--2010 年为 39%，是经合组织平均水平 15% 的两倍多。在性别平等方面，世界经济论坛将韩国排在第 111 位，落后于苏里南、阿拉伯联合酋长国和阿尔巴尼亚。当然，在中国和印度，女性面临的挑战是如何出生。重男轻女的文化和科学的进步增加了性别选择性流产的数量，造成了危险的人口失衡。



Why the disconnect between female leaders and social and economic advancement? In an April 2012 report titled “Rising to the Top?” Tuminez points to Asia’s dynastic traditions. Women often attain power on account of who their fathers, husbands, or family are. Here, think Sonia Gandhi in India, Megawati Soekarnoputri in Indonesia, Benazir Bhutto in Pakistan, Corazon Aquino and Gloria Macapagal Arroyo in the Philippines, Yingluck Shinawatra in Thailand, and Park in Geun-hye Korea. Park is the daughter of the dictator Park Chun-hee.

为什么女性领导者与社会和经济进步脱节？在 2012 年 4 月题为 "崛起于顶峰？的报告中，图米内兹指出了亚洲的王朝传统。女性往往因其父亲、丈夫或家人的身份而获得权力。印度的索尼娅-甘地、印尼的梅加瓦蒂-苏加诺普特丽、巴基斯坦的贝娜齐尔-布托、菲律宾的科拉松-阿基诺和格洛丽亚-马卡帕加尔-阿罗约、泰国的英拉-西那瓦和韩国的朴槿惠都是如此。朴槿惠是独裁者朴春熙的女儿。



Just as in Japan, the unmarried and childless Park has had to suffer her fair share of gender-related indignities. During the late 2012 election, Park Kwang-on, a spokesman for Park’s political rival Moon Jae-in, said: “Candidate Park has no femininity. She has never lived a life agonizing over childbirth, childcare, education, and grocery prices.” Others said a woman might not be able to stand up to North Korea.

就像在日本一样，未婚未育的朴槿惠不得不承受与性别相关的屈辱。在 2012 年末的大选中，朴槿惠的政治对手文在寅的发言人朴光安（Park Kwang-on）说："朴槿惠候选人没有女性魅力："朴槿惠候选人没有女性特质。她从来没有过为生育、育儿、教育和日用品价格而苦恼的生活"。还有人说，女性可能无法对抗朝鲜。



Korea’s failure to address its own gender problems openly and urgently reduces the odds of producing the next Samsung Electronics Co. or Hyundai Motor Co. Only half of the country’s women aged 15 years or older were working in 2012 and enrollment of females in higher education is the lowest among 34 OECD members. That must change if Korea is to thrive, and who better to engineer the shift than Madam President? It isn’t enough that Park challenges stereotypes in a nation ruled by men in dark suits. She must help women balance the dual demands of work and family. More plentiful and affordable childcare is an important first step. Quotas for female executives and senior government-ministry jobs should be considered. This no longer is just an issue of fairness or human rights. Growth and prosperity hang on gender equality. Put it that way and even the aging, gray-haired men who cling to power in Asia might get it.

韩国未能公开而紧迫地解决其自身的性别问题，这降低了产生下一个三星电子公司或现代汽车公司的几率。2012 年，韩国 15 岁及以上的女性中只有一半在工作，女性高等教育入学率在经合组织 34 个成员国中最低。韩国要想蓬勃发展，就必须改变这种状况，而谁能比总统女士更适合策划这种转变呢？在一个由身着深色西装的男性统治的国家，朴槿惠挑战陈规定型观念是远远不够的。她必须帮助妇女平衡工作和家庭的双重需求。提供更多负担得起的托儿服务是重要的第一步。应考虑女性高管和政府部门高级职位的配额。这不再仅仅是一个公平或人权问题。增长和繁荣取决于性别平等。这样说来，即使是亚洲那些年事已高、白发苍苍的掌权者也会明白这一点。



Consider an October 2010 study by U.S. and Korean researchers including Harvard Business School’s Jordan Siegel that found multinational companies were profiting from Korean competitors. Its conclusion: If you operate in a sexist country full of educated, talented women, it makes good business sense to tap them for management roles.

哈佛商学院乔丹-西格尔（Jordan Siegel）等美国和韩国研究人员在 2010 年 10 月进行的一项研究发现，跨国公司正在从韩国竞争对手那里获利。研究的结论是如果你在一个充满性别歧视、受过良好教育、才华横溢的女性充斥的国家开展业务，那么让她们担任管理职位就具有良好的商业意义。



“There is often a strong economic case to be made for increasing female participation at all levels of the labor force,” McKinsey says. “In Japan—which has one of the lowest female labor participation rates among OECD countries—the labor force is predicted to shrink by 15 percent between 2010 and 2030, threatening GDP growth. Women could help to fill this gap.” In Malaysia, McKinsey estimates that raising the participation rates of women to match those of Korea or Singapore could boost GDP by between 6 billion and 9 billion ringgit.

"麦肯锡表示："提高女性在各级劳动力队伍中的参与率往往具有很强的经济意义。"日本是经合组织国家中女性劳动参与率最低的国家之一，预计在 2010 年至 2030 年期间，日本的劳动力将减少 15%，从而威胁到国内生产总值的增长。女性可以帮助填补这一缺口。麦肯锡估计，在马来西亚，提高女性参与率，使其达到韩国或新加坡的水平，可以使国内生产总值增长 60 亿至 90 亿林吉特。



The business case for opening more senior positions to women is painfully clear. As McKinsey puts it: “Unless they do so, companies are surrendering two important sources of competitive advantage: having the best talent in an age of talent scarcity, and capitalizing on the particular performance benefits that women in leadership positions bring to an organization.”

向女性开放更多高级职位的商业理由显而易见。正如麦肯锡所说"如果不这样做，企业就会失去竞争优势的两个重要来源：在人才稀缺的时代拥有最优秀的人才，以及利用女性担任领导职务给企业带来的特殊绩效优势"。



It’s surprising how governments don’t realize that failing to harness half of the population holds back growth. Airplanes that need two engines to fly don’t take off when one isn’t working, so why do nations think they can thrive in our madly competitive world with one engine? Korea is a case in point. It must close its male–female divide to keep up with Asia’s upstart economies as its population ages and shrinks. Drafting more women for senior and middle management may be just what Korea Inc. needs. The same goes for encouraging more women to run for political office.

令人惊讶的是，政府并没有意识到，如果不能利用一半的人口，就会阻碍经济增长。需要两个引擎才能飞行的飞机在一个引擎失灵的情况下是无法起飞的，那么为什么各国会认为只靠一个引擎就能在竞争激烈的世界中茁壮成长呢？韩国就是一个很好的例子。随着人口的老龄化和萎缩，韩国必须缩小男女比例差距，才能跟上亚洲新兴经济体的步伐。招募更多女性担任中高层管理人员，可能正是韩国公司所需要的。鼓励更多女性竞选政治职位也是如此。



One of the paradoxes of Korea is education. Its institutions of higher education are meritocratic and produce legions of bright, qualified workers of both sexes. Even so, Korean women are chronically underemployed by OECD standards. Siegel and his team of researchers from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Hanshin University looked at hundreds of medium-sized and large companies operating in Korea. In the last decade, they found, a 10 percent increase in female managers was good for a 1 percent jump in profits generated by assets. Samsung Electronics Co. demonstrates the point. In the early 2000s, it had no women executives; by 2010, female employees made up 40 percent of the total workforce of 187,800 and 10 percent of managers. In 2010, perhaps unsurprisingly, Samsung, the world’s largest television maker, really began to eclipse Japan’s Sony Corp.

韩国的悖论之一是教育。韩国的高等教育机构任人唯贤，培养了大批聪明、合格的男女工人。即便如此，按照经合组织的标准，韩国女性的就业率却长期偏低。西格尔及其来自麻省理工学院和阪神大学的研究团队调查了数百家在韩国运营的大中型公司。他们发现，在过去十年中，女性管理人员增加 10%，资产产生的利润就会增加 1%。三星电子公司（Samsung Electronics Co.本世纪初，该公司还没有女性高管；到 2010 年，女性员工占 18.78 万员工总数的 40%，占管理人员的 10%。2010 年，作为全球最大的电视机制造商，三星开始真正超越日本索尼公司，这也许并不令人意外。



Womenomics can be linked to many of Korea’s biggest challenges. Rigid mind-sets, for example, make it difficult for women to have both a fulfilling career and a family. Many end up putting off childbirth or having fewer kids, the result of which is one of the lowest birthrates anywhere. Gender will grow in importance as developing Asia thrives. From China to Malaysia, many business cultures are less apt to let gender decide who gets big promotions. It’s something Park should be contemplating as China rises and Asian upstarts like the Philippines and Indonesia gain on her population.

妇女经济学与韩国面临的许多最大挑战有关。例如，僵化的思想观念使女性难以同时拥有美满的事业和家庭。许多人最终推迟生育或减少生育，结果导致韩国成为世界上出生率最低的国家之一。随着亚洲发展中国家的蓬勃发展，性别问题的重要性将与日俱增。从中国到马来西亚，许多商业文化都不太愿意让性别来决定谁能得到高升。随着中国的崛起，菲律宾和印尼等亚洲后起之秀人口的增加，朴槿惠应该考虑这个问题。



Korea’s export-led model worked spectacularly. Yet Korea’s growth strategy has outlived its usefulness. The next phase must be about ideas and innovation, not factories. Korea will need all the collective brainpower it can muster—male and female. If Korea doesn’t begin making the most out of its women, multinationals will.

韩国的出口导向型模式取得了巨大成功。然而，韩国的增长战略已经过时。下一阶段必须依靠创意和创新，而不是工厂。韩国将需要所有的集体智慧，无论男女。如果韩国不开始充分利用女性，跨国公司就会这样做。





Managing gender dynamics better than Japan will help China, too. Women hold up half the sky, as Mao Zedong famously declared. Decades later, they don’t hold up much of anything in the halls of Chinese power. In late 2012, Liu Yang proved the inverse of Mao’s point. Then 34, she became the first Chinese woman to orbit the Earth. Yet her milestone highlighted a less heavenly reality remarked on widely at the time: It’s easier for a Chinese woman to circle our planet in outer space than to reach the highest rungs of male-dominated Beijing politics.

比日本更好地管理性别动态也将有助于中国。妇女能顶半边天，这是毛泽东的名言。几十年后的今天，在中国的权力殿堂中，妇女却没有撑起半边天。2012 年底，刘洋证明了毛泽东观点的反面。时年34岁的她成为第一位绕地球飞行的中国女性。然而，她的里程碑凸显了当时广为人知的一个不那么神圣的现实：对于一名中国女性来说，环绕地球外太空飞行比登上男性主导的北京政坛最高层要容易得多。



As self-described reform President Xi prepared to take the reins, there was great hope that a woman would be included in the Politburo Standing Committee, China’s most powerful body. While one did make it to the orbit of the broader 25-member Politburo, the outcome had China watchers lamenting how the Communist Party remains an old-boys club. Women will just have to cool their heels for another 10 years.

当自诩为改革家的习主席准备执掌大权时，人们曾对中国最有权力的机构--政治局常委会中出现一位女性抱有很大希望。虽然确实有一位女性进入了由 25 名成员组成的政治局的轨道，但这一结果让中国的观察家们感叹共产党仍然是一个老男孩俱乐部。妇女们只能再等十年了。



Of course, China did fare better on the latest Forbes list of powerful women than Japan. It included Margaret Chan, head of the World Health Organization; Wu Yajun of Longfor Properties; Zhang Xin of Soho China; Liyuan Peng, China’s first lady; Sun Yafang of Huawei Technologies; Jennifer Li of Baidu; and Lan Yang of Sun Media Group. In general, though, women are barely represented in the top echelons of China’s government and the biggest state-owned companies. Boosting their role would invigorate industry and buttress the legitimacy of the Communist Party.

当然，在最新的福布斯女强人排行榜上，中国的表现要好于日本。其中包括世界卫生组织负责人陈冯富珍、龙湖地产的吴亚军、SOHO 中国的张欣、中国第一夫人彭丽媛、华为技术有限公司的孙亚芳、百度的李彦宏和阳光媒体集团的杨澜。但总体而言，女性在中国政府和最大国有企业的高层中几乎没有代表。提高她们的作用将为产业注入活力，并巩固共产党的合法性。



Gender discrimination isn’t a big issue among investors. The phenomenon doesn’t feed easily into stock valuations, bond yields, or gross domestic product figures. So the negative implications are underappreciated, especially when you consider how readily it can be fixed. Development economists from Lawrence Summers to William Easterly to Jeffrey Sachs have long linked female empowerment to faster economic growth, higher returns on investment, increased productivity, improved agricultural yields, and more favorable demographics. For an industrializing nation to neglect women is akin to fighting with one limb tied behind its back. That’s unwise as China faces a widening rich–poor divide that could fan social upheaval and anti-regime sentiment.

性别歧视在投资者中并不是一个大问题。这种现象不会轻易反映在股票估值、债券收益率或国内生产总值数据中。因此，性别歧视的负面影响被低估了，尤其是当你考虑到性别歧视是多么容易解决的时候。长期以来，从劳伦斯-萨默斯（Lawrence Summers）、威廉-伊斯特里（William Easterly）到杰弗里-萨克斯（Jeffrey Sachs）等发展经济学家都将女性赋权与更快的经济增长、更高的投资回报、更高的生产率、更高的农业产量以及更有利的人口结构联系在一起。对于一个工业化国家来说，忽视女性无异于背着一条肢体作战。在中国面临贫富差距不断扩大、可能引发社会动荡和反政府情绪的情况下，这样做是不明智的。



The world doesn’t tend to see China’s gender problems. It sees China’s 7-percent-plus growth; a central government with remarkable discipline; trillions of dollars of currency reserves; crane-bristling mega-cities; armies of bankers and executives working with single-minded purpose; scientists who develop supercomputers that rank among the world’s fastest; and legions of engineers capable of rerouting giant rivers like the Yangtze. We rarely consider the structural flaws.

世界往往看不到中国的性别问题。他们看到的是中国 7 个百分点以上的经济增长；纪律严明的中央政府；数万亿美元的货币储备；鹤立鸡群的特大城市；一心一意工作的银行家和高管大军；开发出世界上速度最快的超级计算机的科学家；以及能够改道长江等大河的工程师军团。我们很少考虑结构性缺陷。



Bureaucratic traditions in business and government aren’t flexible enough to accommodate women who want to take time off to have a family. A job in Chinese government can mean a life of liquor-fueled official banquets where professional relationships are forged. Only 2 women have been appointed governor of any of China’s 31 provinces and 4 biggest municipalities since the founding of the People’s Republic in 1949; none are now serving. In the United States, by contrast, 32 women were elected governors of the 50 states in that time.

企业和政府中的官僚传统不够灵活，无法照顾到想要请假生孩子的女性。在中国政府工作可能意味着在酒池肉林的官方宴会上建立职业关系。自1949年中华人民共和国成立以来，在中国31个省和4个最大的直辖市中，只有2位女性被任命为省长，目前没有一位。相比之下，美国 50 个州中有 32 位女性当选州长。



The lack of female progress in the public sector belies successes in the private realm. Chinese women may not hold up half the sky, but they account for half of the world’s self-made female billionaires, according to the Hurun Report. It found that 14 of the 28 female innovators with riches of more than $1 billion were mainlanders. Matching that record in the public sector would serve China’s economy well as the country tries to transform itself from the world’s factory floor into a leader in services and technology. By failing to harness the full potential of half of the talent pool, China surely is limiting its growth possibilities.

女性在公共部门的发展乏善可陈，却掩盖了她们在私人领域的成功。根据《胡润百富榜》，中国女性或许不能撑起半边天，但她们却占据了全球白手起家的亿万女富豪的半壁江山。该报告发现，在 28 位财富超过 10 亿美元的女性创新者中，有 14 位是大陆人。在中国试图从世界工厂转型为服务和技术领导者的过程中，如果公共部门也能取得这样的成绩，将对中国经济大有裨益。如果不能充分利用人才库中一半人才的潜力，中国的增长潜力肯定会受到限制。



China needs to act far more urgently than Japan has to close its gender gaps. Among the biggest is a girl shortage. By 2020, as many as 40 million more men than women will reach adulthood and enter the world’s most competitive mating market. That estimate, which may actually prove to be conservative, will become a stark economic reality on Xi Jinping’s watch. China’s president has barely broached this population mismatch in speeches, never mind suggested solutions.

要缩小性别差距，中国需要比日本更迫切地采取行动。其中最大的问题是女孩短缺。到 2020 年，成年男性将比女性多出 4000 万人，他们将进入世界上竞争最激烈的交配市场。这一估计可能被证明是保守的，但在习近平的眼皮底下，这将成为严峻的经济现实。中国国家主席在讲话中几乎没有提及这一人口错配问题，更不用说提出解决方案了。



Economics partly explains China’s cultural preference for sons. Parents can hope to live with their sons in old age, offering them a clear retirement plan of sorts, whereas daughters tend to enter other family systems. The resulting testosterone glut is the most unintended and dangerous side effect of the one-child policy. Tens of millions—or hundreds of millions in the decades ahead—of young ambitious men unable to find girlfriends or wives can’t be good for any economy, never mind one poised to surpass the United States. Will the economics of sexual frustration lead to families auctioning off their daughters? Anyone who has watched the popular Chinese game show One Out of 100, where attractive young women pick from a herd of lonely guys, has to wonder about how Chinese mating dynamics will lead to state-sanctioned polyandry someday, whereby women marry multiple men? Neither George Orwell nor Isaac Asimov ever dreamed up a science fiction tale as complicated as China’s future. In a 2012 study, “The Competition for Brides in East Asia,” researcher Soohyung Lee did just that. Will North Korea’s main export soon be marriage-aged women?

经济学是中国重男轻女文化的部分原因。父母希望在年老时与儿子生活在一起，为他们提供某种明确的退休计划，而女儿则倾向于进入其他家庭体系。由此产生的睾丸激素过剩是独生子女政策最意外、最危险的副作用。数以千万计--或在未来几十年内数以亿计--雄心勃勃的年轻人找不到女朋友或妻子，这对任何经济来说都不是好事，更不用说一个即将超越美国的经济了。性挫折经济学会导致家庭拍卖女儿吗？看过中国流行的游戏节目《百里挑一》（One Out of 100）的人都不禁要问，中国的交配动态会不会导致国家认可的一夫多妻制，即女性嫁给多个男性？无论是乔治-奥威尔（George Orwell）还是艾萨克-阿西莫夫（Isaac Asimov），都从未梦想过像中国未来这样复杂的科幻故事。在 2012 年的研究报告《东亚的新娘之争》中，研究员李秀亨（Soohyung Lee）就是这样做的。朝鲜的主要出口产品很快会是适婚年龄的女性吗？



“It’s critical for China to do everything in its power to redress the deteriorating sex ratio among China’s birth population, even if this means moving toward a two-child policy,” says Valerie Hudson, a coauthor of Sex and World Peace.

"性与世界和平》一书的作者之一瓦莱丽-哈德森（Valerie Hudson）说："中国必须竭尽全力纠正出生人口中不断恶化的性别比，即使这意味着向二胎政策迈进。



Internal, regional, and even international security is compromised by the fact that approximately 15 percent of its young adult males will not be able to form conventional households. China need only look to its own imperial history to see the destabilizing consequences of devaluing daughters.

由于约 15% 的青壮年男性无法组建常规家庭，国内、地区甚至国际安全都将受到损害。中国只需回顾一下自己的帝国历史，就能看到贬低女儿价值所带来的不稳定后果。





Some historians worry Asia’s bachelor generations could even fuel wars in the decades ahead. Harvard University’s Niall Ferguson, for example, wonders if it will incite Arab Spring–like uprisings, Brazilian-style crime, or worse. Europe’s continent-wide wars and colonial conquests are sometimes seen as manifestations of population stresses. It isn’t that hard to imagine how the unmet needs of young men might mix with perceptions that China’s economy is rigged for the party elites. Try as he might to intensify Internet censorship, Xi will find it hard to keep China’s struggling masses from learning how rich Communist Party members are becoming. Tens of millions of young, underpaid, and unloved men angry at their leaders is in no one’s interest. Over the next decade, Xi will have to keep China’s demographic sky from falling. Hence the Communist Party’s move in November 2013 to ease the one-child policy somewhat.

一些历史学家担心，亚洲的单身一代甚至会在未来几十年里引发战争。例如，哈佛大学的尼尔-弗格森（Niall Ferguson）就怀疑，这是否会引发类似 "阿拉伯之春 "的起义、巴西式的犯罪或更糟糕的情况。欧洲大陆的战争和殖民征服有时被视为人口压力的表现。不难想象，年轻人的需求得不到满足，加上人们认为中国的经济是为党内精英操纵的，会产生怎样的结果。尽管习近平想方设法加强互联网审查，但他很难阻止中国挣扎中的大众了解共产党员是如何变得富有的。数千万工资低、不受爱戴的年轻人对自己的领导人感到愤怒，这不符合任何人的利益。未来十年，习近平必须防止中国人口的天空坍塌。因此，中国共产党在 2013 年 11 月放宽了独生子女政策。





India has its own gender crisis. In 2013, the lens of the world was on a series of brutal gang rapes, which precipitated huge protests over India’s shameful record on women’s rights in the world’s biggest democracy. A longer-term problem is the dwindling odds of girls being born. In the 1990s, economist Amartya Sen drew attention to the phenomenon of “missing women.” American feminist writer Mary Anne Warren goes ever further, calling the exploding number of sex-selection abortions “gendercide.”

印度也有自己的性别危机。2013 年，全世界的目光都聚焦在一系列残忍的轮奸案上，这引发了人们对印度这个世界上最大的民主国家在妇女权利方面的可耻记录的大规模抗议。一个长期的问题是女孩出生的几率越来越低。20 世纪 90 年代，经济学家阿马蒂亚-森（Amartya Sen）提请人们注意 "失踪妇女 "现象。美国女权主义作家玛丽-安妮-沃伦（Mary Anne Warren）则更进一步，将数量激增的性别选择堕胎称为 "性别灭绝"。



A key lesson Japan can teach the world is to find your demographic advantages where you can. It can be argued, for example, that Japan’s demographics has its strengths as well as its weaknesses. A contrarian idea, indeed, but worth considering. It’s not like Japan is doing anything about its population. Also, other rich nations will be in the same boat before long, making Japan a population prototype.

日本可以教给世界的一个重要经验是，尽可能找到自己的人口优势。例如，可以说日本的人口结构既有优势，也有劣势。这的确是一个逆向思维，但值得考虑。日本并没有对其人口采取任何措施。而且，其他富裕国家不久也会陷入同样的境地，使日本成为人口原型。



“Wealth is the best contraceptive,” says Nicholas Smith, Japan strategist at CLSA Asia-Pacific Markets, who has long studied the supposed correlation between procreation and economic growth. “There is a well-known correlation between rising per capita GDP and falling fertility.”

里昂证券亚太市场日本策略师尼古拉斯-史密斯（Nicholas Smith）说："财富是最好的避孕药"，他长期研究生育与经济增长之间的假定相关性。"人均 GDP 上升与生育率下降之间存在着众所周知的相关性。



A dwindling workforce scares off investors such as Jim Rogers, Singapore-based chairman of Rogers Holdings. They say there won’t be enough workers to pay off a massive and growing public debt. Smith, on the other hand, is enamored with Japan’s “perfect demographics,” or its surplus of retirees and women to keep the economy growing in the years ahead. This doesn’t conform to the views of most economists. But Japan has all but run out of conventional ways to right an economy still suffering from the crash of the late 1980s. There’s little room to boost growth with borrowing, and interest rates are already near zero.

不断减少的劳动力吓跑了罗杰斯控股公司（Rogers Holdings）驻新加坡主席吉姆-罗杰斯（Jim Rogers）等投资者。他们说，没有足够的工人来偿还巨额且不断增长的公共债务。另一方面，史密斯却对日本 "完美的人口结构 "或其过剩的退休人员和妇女在未来几年保持经济增长感到着迷。这与大多数经济学家的观点并不一致。但是，日本已经用尽了所有的常规方法来挽救仍在遭受 20 世纪 80 年代末经济崩溃之苦的经济。通过借贷来促进经济增长的空间很小，而利率已经接近零。



Nor are officials in Tokyo taking obvious steps such as increasing immigration. After World War II, Germany thrived on comparatively liberal immigration policies, laying the foundations for the economic miracle of the 1950s. Today it is the world’s second-biggest exporter, while Japan is only fourth. In homogeneous Japan, immigration is a taboo issue, leaving us to mull how it can fare with what it has, demographically speaking. The strategy seems to be morphing into Asia’s Switzerland, proving that living standards needn’t shrink as societies age. There also are environmental benefits to making do with fewer people. Can our planet really sustain nine billion people by 2050? Imagine the massive leaps in clean-energy technology required to make things even somewhat sustainable.

东京的官员也没有采取明显的措施，比如增加移民。二战后，德国因相对宽松的移民政策而蓬勃发展，为 20 世纪 50 年代的经济奇迹奠定了基础。如今，德国是世界第二大出口国，而日本仅排在第四位。在同质化严重的日本，移民是一个禁忌问题，这让我们不得不思考，从人口角度看，日本该如何利用现有的人口。这一战略似乎正在蜕变成亚洲的瑞士，证明生活水平不必随着社会老龄化而缩水。减少人口对环境也有好处。到 2050 年，我们的地球真的能承受 90 亿人口吗？试想一下，要想实现可持续发展，清洁能源技术必须实现巨大飞跃。



But for heavily indebted Japan, a low birthrate leads to other problems, including the nation’s credit rating. Unable to balance work and family, more are putting off motherhood. That has sociologists delving, awkwardly at times, into Japanese culture both for answers and solutions.

但是，对于负债累累的日本来说，低出生率导致了其他问题，包括国家的信用评级。由于无法兼顾工作和家庭，越来越多的人推迟生育。这使得社会学家们不得不深入日本文化中寻找答案和解决方案，有时甚至是尴尬的答案和解决方案。



Each year, the Japanese media works itself into a frenzy over condom maker Durex’s figures. In 2010, then–Finance Minister Naoto Kan even asked his staff to work shorter days so they could have more time for dates. Let’s not overstate things, though. If the correlation between sexual frequency, birthrates, and economic growth is so strong, why isn’t Greece, one of the Durex list’s top performers, booming?

每年，日本媒体都会为安全套生产商杜蕾斯的数据大做文章。2010 年，时任财务大臣菅直人甚至要求员工缩短工作时间，以便有更多时间约会。不过，我们还是不要夸大其词。如果性生活频率、出生率和经济增长之间的相关性如此之强，那么杜蕾斯排行榜上的佼佼者希腊为什么没有蓬勃发展呢？



Japan’s supposed libido drought was back in the news in October 2013, with some rather dubious theorizing. An occupational hazard for foreign journalists is traipsing into the woods of “exotic Japan” and getting inexorably lost in its deep forests of stereotypes, fuzzy data, and pimped-up headlines.

2013 年 10 月，日本所谓的 "性欲荒 "再次成为新闻焦点，其中不乏一些颇为可疑的理论。外国记者的职业病之一就是误入 "异国情调的日本 "的森林，并不可避免地迷失在刻板印象、模糊数据和夸大标题的深山老林中。



Such is the case with the media’s renewed obsession with Japanese giving up on sex. This canard emerges every couple of years, but it’s snowballing anew thanks to an October 19, 2013, Observer headline screaming: “Why Have Young People in Japan Stopped Having Sex?” Its references to dominatrices-turned-sex-counselors, men who get turned on by robots, virtual-reality girlfriends, and the extinction of the Japanese people proved too much for Internet aficionados to resist. Editors, too; the Observer’s piece was followed by the Huffington Post quoting a documentary filmmaker asserting, dubiously, that “it’s a strange thing that can only happen in Japan.” The Japanese are really weird, don’t you know, and this celibacy bubble imperiling the future must reflect their peculiar culture. Follow-ups are rolling in from the Washington Post, Slate, Time, and all over the Twittersphere.

媒体再次痴迷于日本人放弃性生活就是这种情况。这种谬论每隔几年就会出现一次 但由于2013年10月19日《观察家报》的头条新闻 "日本年轻人为何停止性生活？"日本年轻人为何停止性生活？"标题中提到了由性骚扰者变身的性咨询师、被机器人挑逗的男人、虚拟现实女友以及日本人的灭绝，这让网络爱好者们难以抗拒。编辑们也是如此；在《观察家报》的文章之后，《赫芬顿邮报》引用了一位纪录片制片人的话，怀疑地断言 "这是只有在日本才会发生的怪事"。日本人真的很奇怪，你不知道吗？这种危及未来的独身主义泡沫一定反映了他们奇特的文化。华盛顿邮报》、《石板报》、《时代周刊》和 Twitter 上的跟帖不断。



At the root of Japan’s supposed sex drought isn’t culture, but economics. This distinction is important because it feeds into Abe’s efforts to end Japan’s 20-year bout with deflation. I, too, have been seduced at times by such data sets. As far back as 2001, I explored sex drives reports, citing findings that Japanese are the world’s least prolific lovers. Such conclusions are quite paradoxical considering the society often seems more oversexed than prudish with its teeming red-light districts, massive porn industry, hard-core manga being read openly on subways, and a thriving love-hotel industry that can’t turn over rooms fast enough.

日本所谓 "性荒漠 "的根源不在于文化，而在于经济。这一区别非常重要，因为它与安倍为结束日本长达 20 年的通货紧缩所做的努力息息相关。我有时也会被这些数据所吸引。早在 2001 年，我就探讨过性欲报告，并引用了日本人是世界上最不多情的人这一结论。考虑到日本红灯区林立、色情业发达、地铁上公开阅读硬核漫画、爱情旅馆业蓬勃发展，翻房速度快得让人喘不过气来，这样的结论似乎有些自相矛盾。



But I’ve come to doubt sensationalist surveys suggesting young Japanese don’t have sex. The real issue is that many avoid traditional, committed relationships out of worries about the future that are far more economic than cultural. If low libido were strictly societal, why do the Czech Republic, Poland, Singapore, South Korea, Spain, and Taiwan have low fertility rates comparable to Japan’s? I don’t see the global media characterizing them as sexless freak shows spiraling in a direction only contemplated in science fiction.

但是，我开始怀疑那些耸人听闻的调查，因为这些调查表明日本年轻人没有性生活。真正的问题是，许多人出于对未来的担忧而回避传统的、坚定的关系，这种担忧更多的是经济因素而非文化因素。如果性欲低下完全是社会因素造成的，那么为什么捷克、波兰、新加坡、韩国、西班牙和台湾的低生育率与日本不相上下呢？我可没看到全球媒体把它们描述成无性的怪胎，朝着科幻小说中才会出现的方向螺旋上升。



“This is the typical weird-and-wacky Japan story that overseas editors seem to gobble up and encourage,” says Jeff Kingston of Temple University. “Of course Japanese have sex and if the number of love-hotels is any barometer, it seems like many are getting plenty of it. How do all those places stay in business if nobody is doing it?”

"坦普尔大学的杰夫-金斯顿（Jeff Kingston）说："这是一个典型的古怪的日本故事，海外编辑们似乎对其趋之若鹜并大加鼓励。天普大学的杰夫-金斯顿说："日本人当然会做爱，而且如果爱情旅馆的数量是一个晴雨表的话，似乎很多日本人都在做爱。如果没有人做爱，那么这些地方是如何维持经营的呢？



To Kingston, the basic premise is flawed. “Japan has a low birthrate and thus it must be a lack of sex,” he says. “That’s not exactly compelling logic that overlooks all the main factors behind couples’ decisions not to have more children.”

在金斯顿看来，这个基本前提是有缺陷的。"他说："日本出生率低，因此一定是缺乏性。"这种逻辑并不完全令人信服，它忽略了夫妻决定不生育更多孩子背后的所有主要因素"。



Part of the problem is cherry-picked data. Take the 2011 survey by the National Institute of Population and Social Security Research on which sex-drought stories are often based. Its finding that 61 percent of unmarried men and 49 percent of women between ages 18 and 24 were not in any kind of romantic relationship is mentioned up high. Rarely cited is this factoid on page 2 of the report: Almost 90 percent of respondents intend to marry someday. And what about international comparisons? A recent Pew study found that 71 percent of unmarried Americans aren’t in committed relationships. Also, there can be big cultural and generational differences in the meaning of “single,” “dating” and “having sex.” And Japan’s lack of immigration complicates demographic dynamics considerably.

问题的部分原因在于数据的偷梁换柱。就拿性干旱报道经常依据的美国国家人口与社会保障研究所 2011 年的调查来说吧。该调查发现，61% 的 18-24 岁未婚男性和 49% 的 18-24 岁未婚女性没有任何恋爱关系，这一结果被高调提及。报告第 2 页的这一事实却很少被提及：近 90% 的受访者打算将来结婚。那么国际比较呢？皮尤最近的一项研究发现，71% 的未婚美国人没有固定的恋爱关系。此外，在 "单身"、"约会 "和 "发生性关系 "的含义方面，文化和代际差异也很大。而且，日本没有移民，这使得人口动态变得相当复杂。



Japan’s low birthrate is about living costs, stress, and confidence. Even after two decades of deflation, prices in Japan for everything from rent to food to entertainment remain among the highest in the world. Economic stagnation and changes in labor laws have restrained wage growth and enabled companies to swap employees into low-paying part-time jobs with few or no benefits. That is excluding more and more Japanese from the lifetime employment system that’s long been the cornerstone of Japan Inc., forcing many to work additional jobs. If you leave for work at 6 a.m. and get home close to midnight, including weekends, where is there time for dating?

日本的低出生率与生活成本、压力和信心有关。即使经历了二十年的通货紧缩，日本从房租、食品到娱乐等各方面的价格仍然是世界上最高的。经济停滞和劳动法的修改限制了工资的增长，使公司能够将员工调换到收入低、福利少或没有福利的兼职工作中。这使得越来越多的日本人被排除在长期以来一直是日本企业基石的终身雇佣制度之外，迫使许多人不得不从事额外的工作。如果你早上 6 点出门上班，回家时已接近午夜，包括周末在内，哪还有时间约会？



Stress and worker insecurity is denting confidence. Young Japanese, especially men, don’t feel financially secure enough to enter into long-term relationships, never mind getting married or starting families. At the same time, Abe has done little to address the institutionalized sexism that exacerbates Japan’s low-birthrate problem. Hardships women face in balancing careers and family encourage many to delay marriage and motherhood. If Japanese felt better about the future, they wouldn’t be so reluctant to start building their own.

压力和工人的不安全感正在削弱人们的信心。日本年轻人，尤其是男性，没有足够的经济安全感来建立长期关系，更不用说结婚或组建家庭了。与此同时，安倍几乎没有采取任何措施来解决制度化的性别歧视问题，这种性别歧视加剧了日本的低生育率问题。女性在平衡事业和家庭方面面临的困难促使许多人推迟结婚和做母亲。如果日本人对未来有更好的预期，他们就不会如此不情愿地开始建设自己的未来。





Japan’s demographics is indeed worthy of study. How it balances a fast-aging population, a gigantic debt burden, and a negligible birthrate—if it’s even possible—will offer insights to officials in Beijing, Berlin, and Washington in the years ahead. But portraying Japanese as sexless oddballs and looking for clues in their culture does more than dehumanize a nation. It misses Japan’s pioneering role in one of the biggest economic challenges of this century as developed nations mature.

日本的人口结构确实值得研究。日本如何在快速老龄化的人口、巨大的债务负担和可以忽略不计的出生率之间取得平衡--如果可能的话--将为北京、柏林和华盛顿的官员们提供未来几年的见解。但是，把日本人描绘成没有性别的怪人，并从他们的文化中寻找线索，这不仅仅是对一个民族的非人化。它忽略了日本在本世纪发达国家成熟过程中面临的最大经济挑战之一中所扮演的先锋角色。



Corporate Japan will have to get over its collective sexism. As it does, women will play a bigger economic role. Retirees are another potential staffing gold mine, Smith said. More and more of Japan’s baby boomers, born after 1945, are reaching the average retirement age of about 63. Wage-cost reductions from their departure will kick in this year and then accelerate. That’s especially true of postwar boom industries such as iron, steel, shipbuilding, heavy engineering, and trading.

日本企业必须克服集体性别歧视。到那时，女性将在经济领域发挥更大的作用。史密斯说，退休人员是另一个潜在的员工金矿。1945年后出生的日本婴儿潮一代中，越来越多的人达到了约63岁的平均退休年龄。由于他们的离去，工资成本将在今年开始下降，然后加速下降。战后繁荣的钢铁、造船、重型工程和贸易等行业尤其如此。



It’s time to rehire many of these aging workers—at lower salaries, of course. For many, an inescapable consequence of living longer is the necessity of working longer. That’s especially true of anyone whose retirement loot was wiped out in the events of 2008. Companies can trim costs while also tapping the intellectual firepower of retirees at a discount to their previous pay packages. The good news is that companies most likely to enjoy a retirement dividend are in mature industries that were the driving force behind Japan’s meteoric growth after the 1960s. Those are now in need of aggressive restructuring. It may give an unexpected boost to the economy.

是时候重新雇用这些老龄工人了--当然是以较低的工资。对许多人来说，寿命延长的一个不可避免的后果就是必须延长工作时间。对于那些在 2008 年的事件中退休后一无所有的人来说，更是如此。公司可以在降低成本的同时，以低于以往薪酬的价格利用退休人员的智力火力。好消息是，最有可能享受退休红利的公司都属于成熟行业，这些行业是日本 20 世纪 60 年代后飞速发展的推动力。这些行业现在需要积极重组。这可能会给经济带来意想不到的推动力。



Japan’s demographic cushions aren’t a cure-all. Without a rapid increase in worker productivity, the nation will find it harder to maintain its high living standards. The rise of China and India and competition from Korea are direct threats to Japan’s future. It may not be all doom and gloom. Yes, Japan is bleeding people. Far from being a crisis, Mark Clifford, executive director of the Asia Business Council, thinks it may offer benefits and clues for other nations heading in Japan’s demographic direction. His chapter in McKinsey’s 2011 book, Reimagining Japan (p. 138), was perhaps most intriguing of all, characterizing the nation as an economic laboratory of sorts.

日本的人口缓冲并不是万能的。如果不迅速提高劳动生产率，日本将很难维持其较高的生活水平。中国和印度的崛起以及来自韩国的竞争直接威胁着日本的未来。也许并不全是厄运和阴霾。是的，日本正在流血。亚洲商业委员会执行董事马克-克利福德（Mark Clifford）认为，这远非一场危机，它可能会为其他国家提供与日本人口发展方向一致的益处和线索。他在麦肯锡 2011 年出版的《重新认识日本》一书（第 138 页）中所写的一章可能是最引人入胜的，他将日本描述为某种经济实验室。



“Japan,” wrote the former South China Morning Post editor, “is conducting a great experiment. No other significant country has ever seen its population plummet so fast without disease or war.” A Japanese child born today, he argued,

"前《南华早报》编辑写道："日本正在进行一场伟大的实验。在没有疾病或战争的情况下，没有任何一个重要国家的人口如此迅速地锐减。他认为，今天出生的日本孩子



over the course of her life, will watch her country complete a fascinating two-and-a-half century arc. The journey so far has taken Japan from a small, isolated nation to an industrialized phenom that peaked for a time as the world’s second-largest economy. Now, as China passed Japan in the GDP league tables, Japan is charting a path that will see it once again become a small nation on the periphery of a teeming, dynamic continent. Therein lies Japan’s greatest challenge in coming decades: to ensure that its impending smallness is beautiful. With the right leadership and the right policies, the country can succeed.

在她的一生中，她将目睹她的国家走过两个半世纪的精彩历程。迄今为止，日本已从一个孤立的小国发展成为一个工业化国家，并一度成为世界第二大经济体。现在，随着中国在国内生产总值排行榜上超越日本，日本正在规划一条道路，它将再次成为充满活力的大陆边缘的一个小国。这就是日本在未来几十年面临的最大挑战：确保其即将到来的小国之美。只要有正确的领导和正确的政策，日本就能取得成功。





Those policies include efficiently using its intellectual and physical capital—its prowess in engineering, manufacturing, environmental sustainability, and supporting research and development. In the age of China, India, and Indonesia, Japan has become a very expensive property in a rather cheap neighborhood. Harnessing its internal strengths is the only way Japan can keep its hard-won high living standards from adjusting downward toward Asia’s developing-nation upstarts.

这些政策包括有效利用其智力和物质资本--其在工程、制造、环境可持续发展和支持研发方面的实力。在中国、印度和印尼的时代，日本已成为廉价社区中的昂贵资产。只有利用好内部优势，日本才能保持来之不易的高生活水准，不被亚洲发展中国家的后起之秀拉低。



That’s easier said than done, of course. It’s just as plausible, Clifford thinks, to picture a “dystopian spiral” amid daunting levels of government debt, scant growth in productivity, and an aversion to immigration that limits the economy’s dynamism and the availability of labor to care for a rapidly aging population—a labor pool that some think will be falling by half over the likely 85-plus-year life span of that girl born today.

当然，说起来容易做起来难。克利福德认为，在令人生畏的政府债务水平、生产力增长乏力、对移民的厌恶限制了经济的活力以及照顾快速老龄化人口的劳动力供应的情况下，描绘 "乌托邦式的螺旋上升 "也是可信的。



“To avoid that outcome,” Clifford argued,

"为了避免这种结果，"克利福德争辩道、



Japan must start now with a hardheaded look at how to cope with its extraordinary situation. There can be no more denial, no more pretending that the demographic ship will somehow dramatically alter course. Wise government policies must ensue, starting with measures to enhance output in some of the nation’s least productive sectors, notably services, so that the falloff in the workforce does not deprive the nation of the resources its living standards require.

日本必须从现在起就开始认真研究如何应对其非同寻常的处境。不能再否认，也不能再假装人口结构会以某种方式发生巨大变化。明智的政府政策必须随之而来，首先要采取措施提高一些生产率最低的部门（尤其是服务业）的产出，这样劳动力的减少才不会剥夺国家生活水平所需的资源。





In the 1990s, Japan suffered a hollowing out of its industrial sector. High wages, overcapacity, and bloated corporate structures led to painful downsizing. Factories closed, jobs went overseas, the lifetime employment that formed the core of Japan’s postwar boom lost traction, deflation deepened, rust-belt cities such as Osaka and Shizuoka lost their buzz, homeless shelters swelled, and the interest rates were cut to zero so that banks could remain solvent. The next phase of hollowing out will be of the human kind, as Japan literally runs out of young, able-bodied workers to replace retirees. The key is raising the productivity of today’s workers and encouraging them to become more entrepreneurial and risk-oriented.

20 世纪 90 年代，日本工业部门出现空心化。高工资、产能过剩和臃肿的企业结构导致了痛苦的裁员。工厂倒闭，工作岗位流向海外，构成日本战后繁荣核心的终身就业失去了牵引力，通货紧缩加深，大阪和静冈等 "铁锈地带 "城市失去了活力，无家可归者收容所激增，为了让银行保持偿付能力，利率被降至零。下一阶段的空洞化将是人的空洞化，因为日本实际上已经没有年轻力壮的工人来替代退休人员了。关键在于提高当代工人的生产率，并鼓励他们变得更具创业精神和风险导向。



Yet driving this transformation requires fresh, forward-looking thinking and a strong political will of the kind that Japan hasn’t seen in decades. As 2013 drew to a close, there were reasons to worry that, on Abe’s watch, Japan’s shameful gender gap could get even worse.

然而，推动这一转变需要新颖、前瞻性的思维，以及日本几十年来从未有过的强烈政治意愿。2013 年即将过去，人们有理由担心，在安倍的眼皮底下，日本可耻的性别差距可能会变得更加严重。



In December 2013, the month of Abe’s first anniversary in office, I touched base again with Rina Bovrisse on what she made of the prime minister’s gender policies. “I see absolutely nothing hopeful about his Womenomics,” she lamented. “Abe will only talk, just like with Fukushima, as Japan’s gender gap gets worse. Of course, empowering women in Japan, implementing Womenomics, will be harder than convincing dolphin eaters to become vegetarians.”

2013 年 12 月，在安倍晋三上任一周年之际，我再次与 Rina Bovrisse 会晤，了解她对首相性别政策的看法。"她感叹道："我完全看不到他的女性经济学有什么希望。"安倍只会空谈，就像在福岛问题上一样，日本的性别差距越来越严重。当然，赋予日本妇女权力、实施妇女经济学，比说服吃海豚的人成为素食主义者还要难。





Chapter 3

The 1,000,000,000,000,000 Yen Monster

When a Debt Market Becomes So Big It Dominates Everything

第 3 章 1,000,000,000,000 日元怪兽当债务市场变得如此庞大，它主宰了一切





Is Japan’s central bank creating the biggest pyramid scheme in world history? It’s a valid question as Governor Haruhiko Kuroda endeavors to do what monetary scientists from Milton Friedman to Anna Schwartz to Robert Mundell would surely say is impossible: creating inflation and sending stocks soaring, while also keeping bond yields below 1 percent, or at the very worst, 2 percent. Negligible borrowing costs is the only way a nation with an aging and shrinking population can service such a massive debt without becoming the next Greece or Argentina.

日本央行是否在制造世界历史上最大的金字塔骗局？这是一个合理的问题，因为日本央行行长黑田东彦正在努力做到从米尔顿-弗里德曼（Milton Friedman）、安娜-施瓦茨（Anna Schwartz）到罗伯特-蒙代尔（Robert Mundell）等货币学家都肯定会说不可能做到的事情：创造通胀，推动股市飙升，同时将债券收益率保持在 1%以下，最差也要保持在 2%以下。借贷成本可忽略不计是一个人口老龄化和萎缩的国家偿还如此巨额债务而不成为下一个希腊或阿根廷的唯一途径。



In August 2013, Japan’s debt reached a dubious milestone: the 1 quadrillion mark, or 1,000,000,000,000,000 yen. That markets hardly noticed is a testament not only to Kuroda’s skill as a policy maker, but to his gravitas. It’s a balancing act that few could conceivably pull off, and a reminder that Abe chose well when filling the top job at the BOJ.

2013 年 8 月，日本的债务达到了一个可疑的里程碑：1 夸脱大关，即 1,000,000,000,000 日元。市场几乎没有注意到这一点，这不仅证明了黑田东彦作为政策制定者的技巧，也证明了他的威严。这是一个很少有人能做到的平衡之举，同时也提醒人们，安倍晋三在填补日本央行最高职位时做了明智的选择。



My favorite Kuroda moment was on a Tokyo-bound flight on March 13, 2011, two days after a gigantic earthquake and tsunami struck northeast Japan. I was in the Philippines when the quake hit and precipitated a nuclear crisis. On the first available flight back, the then-president of the Manila-based Asian Development Bank (ADB) sat near me on an almost-empty Japan Airlines plane. Manila-to-Tokyo flights are rarely made with a single empty seat, but no one likes to fly into a potential Chernobyl, not with tens of thousands in Japan, mostly non-Japanese residents, clamoring for the exits.

我最喜欢的黑田时刻是在 2011 年 3 月 13 日飞往东京的航班上，那是日本东北部发生大地震和海啸两天后。地震发生并引发核危机时，我正在菲律宾。在回程的第一班飞机上，马尼拉亚洲开发银行（ADB）时任行长就坐在我身边，日本航空公司的飞机几乎空无一人。马尼拉飞往东京的航班很少有一个空座位，但没有人喜欢飞进一个潜在的切尔诺贝利核电站，更何况日本有数万人，其中大部分是非日本居民，都在争先恐后地涌向出口。



“We seem to have the whole plane to ourselves,” Kuroda quipped, saying he was returning to Japan to “do what I can to help.”

"我们似乎拥有了整架飞机，"黑田打趣道，他说他将返回日本 "尽我所能提供帮助"。



Those words came to mind two years later in March 2013, when Kuroda returned to his homeland to offer help yet again, this time to end deflation. It was a timely reappearance for a respected economist who had spent the previous eight years in Manila working to reduce poverty. It occurred to me then, as now, that this kind of selflessness made Kuroda an inspired choice to end Japan’s two decades of deflation.

两年后的2013年3月，当黑田再次回到他的祖国提供帮助时，人们想起了这些话，这一次是为了结束通货紧缩。对于一位过去八年一直在马尼拉致力于减少贫困的受人尊敬的经济学家来说，这是一次及时的再次出现。和现在一样，我当时就想到，这种无私奉献的精神使黑田成为结束日本二十年通货紧缩的明智之选。



Long before he settled on Kuroda, Abe made it clear that, in his estimation, incumbent BOJ Governor Shirakawa had been a dismal failure and couldn’t vacate his office fast enough. Abe also made it clear that his BOJ pick would open the yen faucet as widely as possible for as long as it took. If Abe were to say we need more liquidity, according to this view, his guy at the central bank would yell “Hai!” and dutifully boost the money flow. That perception created quite a paradox for Kuroda. Markets liked him because he was a steady hand when overseeing foreign-exchange issues at the Finance Ministry from 1999 to 2003.

早在敲定黑田东彦之前，安倍晋三就明确表示，他认为现任日本央行行长白川方明是一个令人沮丧的失败者，他的卸任速度不够快。安倍晋三还明确表示，他选择的日本央行行长将在尽可能长的时间内尽可能广泛地打开日元水龙头。根据这种观点，如果安倍说我们需要更多的流动性，他在央行的人就会大喊 "海！"并尽职尽责地增加货币流量。这种看法给黑田东彦造成了相当大的矛盾。市场之所以喜欢他，是因为他在 1999 年至 2003 年在大藏省监督外汇问题时表现稳健。



Kuroda’s 2005–2013 stint reducing poverty at the ADB also was intriguing. The whole challenge for the BOJ as it tries to defeat deflation is traction. Its policies had gotten little, and it was imperative that the next governor think outside the box and with a level of creativity that had long eluded Tokyo. A man who had spent the last seven-plus years searching for new and innovative solutions to broaden economic growth, and working with scarce resources, was just what the BOJ needed. Japan’s monetary authority needed a fresh eye and toolkit; Abe found it in Manila.

黑田东彦 2005-2013 年在亚洲开发银行（ADB）从事减贫工作的经历也很耐人寻味。日本央行在试图战胜通货紧缩的过程中面临的整个挑战就是牵引力。日本央行的政策收效甚微，下一任行长必须打破常规，发挥东京长期以来所缺乏的创造力。在过去七年多的时间里，日本央行一直在寻找新的、创新的解决方案来扩大经济增长，并在资源稀缺的情况下开展工作，而这正是日本央行所需要的。日本货币当局需要一个全新的视角和工具包；安倍在马尼拉找到了它。



But Kuroda’s balancing act is just beginning. So far, he’s done a truly supernatural job of increasing inflation expectations while keeping bond yields stable. Kuroda doesn’t wear a wizard’s hat when he arrives at BOJ headquarters each morning, but once inside I do half wonder if he dons a cloak, waves a magic wand, and concocts mysterious potions.

但黑田东彦的平衡之举才刚刚开始。到目前为止，他在提高通胀预期的同时保持债券收益率稳定方面的表现确实超凡脱俗。黑田每天早上到达日本央行总部时并不戴巫师帽，但一旦进入日本央行总部，我就会怀疑他是否穿上斗篷，挥舞魔杖，调制神秘的药剂。



What is Kuroda’s secret? Just how does he bewitch investors into suspending their disbelief and holding onto their government bonds? Janet Yellen over at the Fed would sure love to know as he does battle with the “bond vigilantes,” that mysterious cast of characters who protest fiscal or monetary policies they deem dangerous. Kuroda is winning Bondland’s obedience with two forms of trickery: (1) what economists call “financial repression”—essentially transferring money via monetary policy from citizens to the government; and (2) outright monetization of public debt.

黑田的秘诀是什么？他是如何蛊惑投资者，让他们暂且相信并持有政府债券的？美联储的珍妮特-耶伦（Janet Yellen）肯定很想知道，因为他正在与 "债券守夜人"（即那些抗议他们认为危险的财政或货币政策的神秘人物）作战。黑田东彦正在通过两种手段赢得邦德的服从：（1）经济学家所说的 "金融压制"--即通过货币政策将货币从公民手中转移到政府手中；（2）公债彻底货币化。



Kuroda has to be cagey about engaging in either risky strategy so as not to anger Japanese households or attract the ire of credit-rating companies increasingly worried about Tokyo’s debt trajectory. The longer Kuroda gets away with this dual-pronged magic trick, the better the chances Abe can pull off his own miraculous feat of deregulating the economy.

黑田东彦在采取这两种冒险策略时都必须小心谨慎，以免激怒日本家庭或招致对东京债务轨迹日益担忧的信用评级公司的愤怒。黑田东彦这一双管齐下的妙招越是得心应手，安倍晋三就越有可能实现自己放松经济管制的奇迹。



What would happen, though, if the bond vigilantes got a peek behind the curtain at what the wizard of Tokyo is really up to, and panicked? Japan would be ground zero for the worst debt meltdown in history. Forget Greece—Japan’s debt burden is larger than that of Germany, France, and the United Kingdom combined. The entire world really does have a vested interest in Kuroda keeping the magic alive.

然而，如果债券守夜人窥见了东京巫师幕后的真实意图，并惊慌失措，会发生什么呢？日本将成为历史上最严重的债务危机的爆发点。抛开希腊不谈，日本的债务负担比德国、法国和英国的债务负担总和还要大。黑田东彦能否保持魔力，关系到整个世界的切身利益。



It’s hard to exaggerate what an outsized role the bond market plays in Japan’s stability. Government bonds are the main financial asset held by banks, companies, pension funds, institutions, the postal-savings system, and individuals—in other words, everyone. A one- or two-percentage-point jump in yields would send shockwaves across all sectors of the economy and export contagion overseas.

很难夸大债券市场对日本稳定所起的巨大作用。政府债券是银行、公司、养老基金、机构、邮政储蓄系统和个人--换句话说，每个人--都持有的主要金融资产。收益率跳升一到两个百分点，就会对所有经济部门造成冲击，并向海外输出传染。



The magnitude of Japan’s debt burden and the risks inherent in managing it make James Carville’s 1992 observation about the United States seem almost quaint by comparison. The Clinton White House adviser said that when he dies he wants to be reincarnated as the bond market so he could come back and scare everyone. Bond vigilantes were indeed circling America’s finances at the time. Yet even Carville, whose other famous pronouncement was “It’s the economy, stupid,” could never have imagined a government being as beholden to bondholders as Japan’s is today. Ten years after Carville’s observation, for example, came news that the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency was examining the global implications of Japan’s debt-and-deflation quandary. Press reports of the CIA’s Japan inquiry emerged days after a prescient October 2, 2002, New York Times story exploring whether the United States could one day experience a slump like Japan’s.

日本债务负担的规模和管理债务的内在风险，使詹姆斯-卡维尔（James Carville）1992 年对美国的看法与之相比显得近乎古板。这位克林顿白宫顾问说，他死后想投胎为债券市场，这样他就可以回来吓唬大家了。当时，债券守夜人确实在美国的金融领域盘旋。然而，即使是卡维尔--他的另一句名言是 "这是经济问题，笨蛋"--也无法想象一个政府会像今天的日本政府一样对债券持有人唯命是从。例如，在卡维尔提出这一观点十年后，有消息称美国中央情报局正在研究日本债务和通货紧缩窘境的全球影响。2002 年 10 月 2 日，《纽约时报》先知先觉地报道了美国是否有一天也会经历像日本一样的经济衰退，几天后，媒体就报道了中央情报局对日本的调查。



The most common argument for why Japanese government bonds won’t plummet is their uniquely domestic character; well over 90 percent of public IOUs are held in Japan. And because everyone gets hurt if yields surge, there is little incentive for anyone to bid them higher. It seems counterintuitive that on hearing news that Japan now requires 15 zeroes to express its national debt, the Japanese doubled down and bought more rather than reduce their debt exposure. Indeed, what some might label a pyramid scheme, Japanese see as financial security. Yet mutually assured destruction isn’t a viable strategy in the long run.

日本政府债券不会暴跌的最常见理由是其独特的国内性质；90% 以上的公共借据都在日本持有。而且，如果收益率飙升，所有人都会受到伤害，因此几乎没有人有动力出价抬高收益率。在听到日本现在需要 15 个零来表示其国债的消息后，日本人加倍购买，而不是减少他们的债务风险，这似乎有悖常理。事实上，有些人可能会认为这是传销，但日本人却认为这是金融安全。然而，从长远来看，相互确保的毁灭并不是一个可行的战略。



Count hedge fund manager J. Kyle Bass firmly among those betting Kuroda’s ultraloose policies are hastening what he sees as Tokyo’s inevitable demise. Thirty minutes with the head of Dallas-based Hayman Advisors LP leaves one tempted to buy a farmhouse in the middle of nowhere, pick up a gun or two, prepare for hyperinflation, and brace for a catastrophic meltdown. His claim to fame is making $500 million in 2007 betting against the subprime bonds that undid Wall Street. “In Japan, the situation is more compelling,” he said.

对冲基金经理凯尔-巴斯（J. Kyle Bass）坚定地认为，黑田东彦的超宽松政策正在加速东京不可避免的灭亡。与这位总部位于达拉斯的海曼顾问公司（Hayman Advisors LP）的掌门人交谈 30 分钟，让人不禁想在荒郊野外买一栋农舍，拿上一两把枪，为恶性通货膨胀做好准备，并为灾难性的崩溃做好准备。他的成名作是 2007 年押注次贷债券，赚了 5 亿美元，让华尔街一蹶不振。"他说："在日本，情况更令人信服。



Bass offers the following rationale: Any aging country that spends more than half of its central-government revenue on servicing its debt will be hard-pressed to finance itself at current rates as its workforce shrinks, never mind if debt yields surge. Kuroda doubling the monetary base and actively working to produce inflation may only accelerate the reckoning. So might Abe’s plans to step up fiscal stimulus efforts at a time when Japan needs to be trimming debt.

巴斯提出了以下理由：任何一个老龄化国家，如果将中央政府收入的一半以上用于偿还债务，那么随着劳动力的萎缩，按照目前的利率，它将很难为自己提供资金，更不用说债务收益率激增了。黑田东彦将货币基础增加一倍，并积极制造通胀，可能只会加速这一切的发生。安倍晋三计划在日本需要削减债务的时候加大财政刺激力度，也可能是如此。



“Abe and the BOJ face what I call the ‘rational investor paradox,’” Bass says. “If JGB investors begin to believe that Abenomics will be successful, they will rationally sell JGBs to buy foreign bonds or equities.” Carl Weinberg of High Frequency Economics in Valhalla, New York, thinks that in the years ahead, credit-rating companies will be accused of “criminal negligence” for not lowering Japan’s debt to below investment grade.

"安倍晋三和日本央行面临着我所说的'理性投资者悖论'，"巴斯说。"如果日本国债投资者开始相信安倍经济学会取得成功，他们就会理性地抛售日本国债，购买外国债券或股票。"纽约瓦尔哈拉高频经济公司的卡尔-温伯格（Carl Weinberg）认为，在未来几年里，信用评级公司将因没有将日本债务降至投资级以下而被指责为 "犯罪过失"。



The trouble with Japan’s debt structure isn’t just that you can’t price risk properly. It’s that it’s ultimately unsustainable and there is no plan on the drawing board to address it. Japan has done a remarkable job keeping its pressure-cooker of a bond market from exploding. The clubby nature of the biggest bond market allows policy makers to maintain calm. Someday, though, Japan won’t be able to get enough new money into its bond market to support the irrational expectations of investors. When that day comes, Bass says, the financial world will look back and agree that this was most obvious scenario it’s ever seen. The lesson for developing nations is: Don’t let the bond market dominate all else. And don’t create a monster that requires constant feeding and obsessive maintenance that distracts you from building a more prosperous future.

日本债务结构的问题不仅在于无法正确定价风险。问题在于它最终是不可持续的，而且没有任何计划来解决这个问题。日本做了一件了不起的事情，使其压力巨大的债券市场没有爆炸。这个最大债券市场的俱乐部性质使决策者能够保持冷静。不过，总有一天，日本的债券市场将无法获得足够的新资金来支持投资者的非理性预期。巴斯说，当那一天到来时，金融界回过头来看，会认为这是有史以来最明显的情景。发展中国家要吸取的教训是不要让债券市场主宰其他一切。也不要创造一个需要不断喂养和痴迷于维护的怪物，以免分散你建设更繁荣未来的注意力。





The biggest flaw in Abe’s revival plan is its inconsistencies. As investors ponder a reflated Japan, they will begin to bid up yields. Each sizable spike is prompting the BOJ to come to the rescue with a few trillion dollars worth of yen here and a few trillion there. With the increasing frequency, speed, and magnitude of these interventions, Kuroda is creating a moral-hazard pattern.

安倍晋三复兴计划的最大缺陷在于前后矛盾。当投资者在思考一个重新膨胀的日本时，他们将开始竞相抬高收益率。每一次大幅飙升都会促使日本央行出手相救，这里投几万亿美元，那里投几万亿美元。随着这些干预措施的频率、速度和规模不断增加，黑田东彦正在创造一种道德风险模式。



The trouble is this: The more liquidity the BOJ adds to the market, the more it feeds inflation expectations that drive up yields, the more it needs to do to stabilize the market. Picture a factory conveyor belt that speeds up faster and faster, making it harder for workers to keep up. Eventually, the BOJ gets trapped into this pyramid scheme. How does Japan expect bondholders to sit by quietly if inflation increases to 2 percent and beyond? They won’t, of course, leaving Japan with rapidly rising debt-servicing costs and investors running for cover as sub-1-percent 10-year bond yields head to 2 or 3 percent. This is the first and biggest inconsistency.

问题在于此：日本央行向市场注入的流动性越多，就越会助长通胀预期，从而推高收益率，日本央行就越需要采取更多措施来稳定市场。想象一下，工厂传送带的速度越来越快，工人很难跟上。最终，日本央行陷入了这个金字塔计划。如果通胀率上升到 2% 或更高，日本如何指望债券持有者会袖手旁观？他们当然不会，这将使日本的偿债成本迅速上升，而当低于 1%的 10 年期债券收益率升至 2%或 3%时，投资者将四处逃窜。这是第一个也是最大的矛盾之处。



Yes, Japan’s financial system is unique, but the idea that Japanese banks, companies, pension funds, universities, endowments, insurance companies, government-run institutions, postal savings system, and individuals (many of whom are elderly and living on a fixed income) won’t sell at some point is just fanciful. Unless government tax revenues surge along with bond yields, Abe and Kuroda will have some explaining to do.

是的，日本的金融体系是独一无二的，但认为日本的银行、公司、养老基金、大学、捐赠基金、保险公司、政府机构、邮政储蓄系统和个人（其中许多是靠固定收入生活的老人）不会在某个时候抛售的想法只是一种幻想。除非政府税收收入与债券收益率同步飙升，否则安倍晋三和黑田东彦将不得不做出一些解释。



Inconsistency 2: thinking you can derive strength from weakness. I’m always amazed by how virtually any Japanese you ask can tell you what the yen/dollar rate is on any given day. Pose the same question to my fellow Americans and you will get many blank stares. Exchange-rate-obsessed Japanese also have an emerging-nation-like view that weakness equals vigor.

不一致之二：认为可以从弱势中获得优势。我总是惊讶地发现，几乎任何一个日本人都能告诉你日元/美元在任何一天的汇率是多少。向我的美国同胞提出同样的问题，你会得到许多白眼。痴迷于汇率的日本人还有一种类似新兴国家的观点，认为疲软等于活力。



Abenomics is basing a Japanese renaissance on the 20 percent drop in the yen since mid-November 2012. It proposes to generate higher consumer prices while thinking inflation-adjusted wages won’t fall. The government is forgetting, too, that if companies need to dole out higher pay without an even greater increase in productivity—a very unlikely event—their global competiveness will drop. That’s the opposite of what Abe purports to do.

安倍经济学将日本的复兴建立在日元自 2012 年 11 月中旬以来下跌 20% 的基础之上。它建议提高消费价格，同时认为通胀调整后的工资不会下降。政府也忘记了，如果企业需要提高工资，但生产率却没有进一步提高--这种情况不太可能发生--那么它们的全球竞争力就会下降。这与安倍晋三的目的恰恰相反。



Inconsistency 3: a wealth effect that won’t come. Abe’s plan is for BOJ largess to lift equity prices, fueling what surrogates call the “confidence effect.” Tokyo was slow to realize that Japan’s credit system was broken. The problem isn’t the supply of yen, but uses for it. Banks are reluctant to lend; companies and households aren’t borrowing. The multiplier effect that makes monetary policy so potent is eluding Japan. The missing ingredient is confidence. Until corporate executives and consumers believe the next 10 years will be more prosperous than the last, deflation will deepen. The government must do its job to create incentives to add jobs and raise incomes.

不一致之三：不会出现的财富效应。安倍晋三的计划是让日本央行的慷慨解囊抬高股票价格，从而助长代言人所说的 "信心效应"。东京迟迟没有意识到日本的信贷体系已经崩溃。问题不在于日元的供应，而在于日元的用途。银行不愿放贷，公司和家庭也不借贷。使货币政策如此有力的乘数效应正在日本消失。缺失的要素是信心。除非企业高管和消费者相信未来 10 年将比上个 10 年更加繁荣，否则通货紧缩将会加深。政府必须尽职尽责，为增加就业岗位和提高收入创造动力。



For a bunch of economists charged with boosting confidence, for example, BOJ staffers sure did seem gloomy as 2013 was drawing to close. On the surface, all was well with the BOJ’s 2 percent inflation target for 2014 or 2015 when board members met on October 31, 2013. But the minutes of that meeting showed unmistakable signs of doubt among those who know more than we do about the breadth and mechanics of the world’s most audacious monetary experiment. Three members dissented from the bank’s preferred view. The gist of the meeting: Ending deflation is harder than the central bank expected.

举例来说，作为一群负责提振信心的经济学家，日本央行的工作人员在 2013 年即将结束时确实显得黯然神伤。表面上看，日本央行董事会成员于 2013 年 10 月 31 日召开会议时，日本央行 2014 年或 2015 年 2% 的通胀目标一切顺利。但这次会议的记录显示，那些比我们更了解世界上最大胆的货币试验的广度和机制的人，对这一目标产生了明确无误的怀疑。三位成员对该行的首选观点持反对意见。会议要点结束通货紧缩比央行预期的要难。



Takehiro Sato wanted to add a line to the final statement declaring that consumer prices “are somewhat tilted to the downside” rather than that risks were “being largely balanced.” Takahide Kiuchi proposed making the BOJ’s 2 percent target more flexible. Sayuri Shirai wanted to highlight upside and downside risks to economic activity and price changes, which seems like code for what happens with inflation is really anyone’s guess.

佐藤武弘希望在最终声明中增加一句话，宣布消费者价格 "有些下行"，而不是风险 "基本平衡"。木内隆秀建议使日本央行 2% 的目标更具灵活性。白井小百合（Sayuri Shirai）希望强调经济活动和价格变化的上行和下行风险。



Why isn’t the BOJ getting more traction? Blame “Scroogenomics,” which is turning into a headwind that Abe probably didn’t anticipate while devising his program to revitalize Japan Inc. The whole thrust of the first two waves of “Abenomics” was for massive monetary and fiscal stimulus to drive asset prices higher and the yen lower to boost corporate profits enough so that executives would raise wages. From there, as consumers spent more and a virtuous cycle of even greater corporate profits created vast amounts of new wealth, Abe would be able to engineer structural reforms to produce a genuine economic boom. But that plan is slamming into stingy corporate executives.

为什么日本央行没有获得更多牵引力？这要归咎于 "安倍经济学"（Scroogenomics），安倍在制定振兴日本公司的计划时，可能没有预料到 "安倍经济学 "会变成一股逆风。前两波 "安倍经济学 "的主旨是通过大规模的货币和财政刺激来推动资产价格上涨和日元贬值，从而提高企业利润，让高管们提高工资。在此基础上，随着消费者增加消费，以及企业利润增长的良性循环创造出大量新财富，安倍晋三将能够进行结构性改革，从而实现真正的经济繁荣。但这一计划正遭到吝啬的企业高管们的猛烈抨击。



A Nikkei survey of chief financial officers from 241 listed major companies released on November 25 told the story. Companies were flush with cash, but reluctant to share it with workers. Executives are plenty keen on capital spending and research and development, but not on upping salaries. Publicly traded companies that end the fiscal year in March, Nikkei said, had record combined cash reserves of about $690 billion.

日经指数》11 月 25 日发布的一项针对 241 家大型上市公司首席财务官的调查就说明了这一点。公司资金充裕，但不愿与员工分享。高管们热衷于资本支出和研发，但不愿意提高工资。日经新闻》称，3月份结束财政年度的上市公司的现金储备总额约为6900亿美元，创历史新高。



The bad news: Only 7 percent of respondents said they may use some of these reserves to raise salaries. “On the whole, however, major companies remain cautious about upping wages,” Nikkei said. And for that, Abe must bear some of the blame, as roughly half of CFOs believe his government’s green light to raise consumption taxes from 5 percent to 8 percent in April will hurt bottom lines.

坏消息是只有 7% 的受访者表示，他们可能会动用部分储备金来提高工资。"日经新闻》称："但总体而言，大型企业对提高工资仍持谨慎态度。对此，安倍晋三必须承担部分责任，因为大约一半的首席财务官认为，安倍政府在四月份将消费税从 5% 提高到 8% 的绿灯将损害企业的底线。



The mention of Scroogenomics in the accompanying Nikkei article was partly a nod to University of Minnesota economist Joel Waldfogel’s book titled thus, but also to the timing of Abe’s first term in office. The day after Christmas, December 26, marked the one-year mark for Abe’s term as prime minister and his attempt to end deflation. And, well, other than importing more inflation via energy imports—in other words, bad inflation—he had little to show for the effort. The problem, of course, is the very confidence BOJ officials want to generate. No matter how many times Governor Kuroda promises investors that inflation is on the way, he’s talking to the wrong audience. It’s the Scrooges in corporate boardrooms who need convincing, not to mention his own BOJ staffers.

日经新闻》随附文章中提到 "Scroogenomics"，一方面是对明尼苏达大学经济学家乔尔-瓦尔德福格尔（Joel Waldfogel）以此为题的著作的赞许，另一方面也是对安倍晋三第一个任期的时间安排的赞许。圣诞节后的第二天，即 12 月 26 日，是安倍晋三担任首相和试图结束通货紧缩的一年纪念日。然而，除了通过能源进口输入更多的通胀--换句话说，就是恶性通胀--安倍的努力并没有得到什么回报。当然，问题恰恰出在日本央行官员想要建立的信心上。无论日本央行行长黑田东彦多少次向投资者承诺通胀即将来临，他都没有找对听众。需要说服的是企业会议室里的吝啬鬼，更不用说他自己的日本央行员工了。



Economist Richard Katz, editor-in-chief of the New York–based Oriental Economist Report, doubts rising equities matter much from a confidence standpoint in Japan in the long run. Much of the support for shares is speculative; it’s not that Japanese companies are being more responsive to shareholder gripes. And it’s largely an overseas-investor phenomenon. Too few Japanese own stocks, and for those who do, holdings tend to be too small to drive consumer spending. About 40 percent of stocks are owned by the richest 20 percent of the population; two-thirds of stocks are owned by people over age 60.

经济学家理查德-卡茨（Richard Katz）是纽约《东方经济学家报告》（Oriental Economist Report）的主编。对股票的支持在很大程度上是投机性的，并不是说日本公司对股东的不满有了更好的回应。这主要是海外投资者的现象。拥有股票的日本人太少，而对于那些拥有股票的日本人来说，持有的股票往往太少，无法推动消费支出。约 40% 的股票由最富有的 20% 人口持有；三分之二的股票由 60 岁以上的人持有。



“The alleged wealth effect from the stock market rally is more of an advertising slogan from the PR firm of ‘Abenomics Happy Talk’ than a serious economic analysis,” Katz said.

"所谓股市上涨带来的财富效应，与其说是严肃的经济分析，不如说是'安倍经济学开心辞'公关公司的广告语，"卡茨说。



Inconsistency 4: exporting into a weak world economy. On May 29, 2013, Kuroda gave a timely speech about the world still struggling to shake off the effects of the 2008 crisis. Japan can drive the yen down all it wants, but we live in a “G-Zero” era that Ian Bremmer, president of Eurasia Group in New York, described in his 2012 book, Every Nation for Itself. It’s one devoid of growth engines.

不一致之四：向疲软的世界经济出口。2013 年 5 月 29 日，黑田东彦就世界仍在努力摆脱 2008 年危机的影响发表了及时的讲话。纽约欧亚集团总裁伊恩-布雷默（Ian Bremmer）在其2012年出版的《每个国家为自己》一书中描述了一个 "G-Zero "时代。这是一个缺乏增长引擎的时代。



America’s recovery is tepid, at best. Chinese growth is heading lower for the next several years. Europe’s crisis is always just one credit downgrade away from resuming. To whom does Abe think Japan will be selling freighters full of goods? Also, Japan is importing more and more raw materials to meet energy needs with a falling currency. Even before Abenomics, Japan had little clout in global commodity markets. China is a prime maker; Japan is a taker.

美国的经济复苏充其量只是不温不火。中国的经济增长在未来几年都将走低。欧洲的危机永远只差一次信用降级就会卷土重来。安倍晋三以为日本会把满载货物的货轮卖给谁呢？此外，日本正在进口越来越多的原材料，以满足货币贬值带来的能源需求。即使在安倍经济学之前，日本在全球商品市场上也没有什么影响力。中国是主要的制造者，日本则是接受者。



Inconsistency 5: trading partners won’t stay quiet. Nations like Korea are becoming more vocal about what they see as beggar-thy-neighbor policies in Tokyo. The outcry may increase as Asian growth slows and leaders struggle to support export industries.

不一致 5：贸易伙伴不会保持沉默。韩国等国对东京以邻为壑的政策越来越不满。随着亚洲经济增长放缓，各国领导人努力支持出口产业，这种呼声可能会越来越高。





Kuroda is indeed finding himself on a financial treadmill. The violent swings in government yields in May and June 2013 prompted him to crush the skeptics with overwhelming monetary force. The question is whether he can continue to up the ante. For now, at least, Kuroda’s policies are keeping the peace in Bondland. That in turn is accelerating a huge redistribution of wealth within society from creditors (the people) to debtors (Japan’s Ministry of Finance). That’s pushing inflation-adjusted interest rates even further into negative territory and giving the government cheaper financing.

黑田东彦确实发现自己正处于金融 "跑步机 "上。2013 年 5 月和 6 月政府收益率的剧烈波动促使他以压倒性的货币力量粉碎了怀疑论者。问题在于他能否继续加大力度。至少就目前而言，黑田的政策维持了邦德地区的和平。这反过来又加速了社会财富从债权人（民众）到债务人（日本财务省）的巨大再分配。这将通胀调整后的利率进一步推向负值，并为政府提供了更低廉的融资成本。



Debt monetization is clearly a part of the mix. Again, Kuroda can’t really admit that the central bank has morphed into the Ministry of Finance’s ATM. It’s a fact, though, that the BOJ is now the dominant buyer of government debt at auction (more than 70 percent, in some cases) and a steadily growing one, too. What the BOJ does with much of that debt might never be known. Stick it in a file cabinet? Burn it? Doing so would be to take a page from Korekiyo Takahashi, the 1930s finance minister whose unconventional policies earned him a reputation as Japan’s answer to John Maynard Keynes. Abe says Takahashi’s exploits “emboldened” him to get radical. The unanswered question, of course, is just how radical?

债务货币化显然是其中的一部分。同样，黑田东彦也无法真正承认央行已蜕变为大藏省的自动取款机。但事实是，日本央行现在是拍卖国债的主要买家（在某些情况下超过 70%），而且还在稳步增长。日本央行如何处理这些债务可能永远不会为人所知。塞进文件柜？烧掉？这样做无异于效仿 20 世纪 30 年代的日本财政大臣高桥克洋（Korekiyo Takahashi），他的非常规政策为他赢得了 "日本的约翰-梅纳德-凯恩斯（John Maynard Keynes）"的美誉。安倍晋三说，高桥的功绩为他 "壮胆"，让他变得激进。当然，悬而未决的问题是，究竟有多激进？



If only Japan could get radical on another debt front: the nation’s $1.2 trillion of currency reserves. Japan, America’s closest ally in Asia, has long been an enthusiastic buyer of dollars. Yet Japan is at the center of the financial arms race that has swept Asia since the 1997 crisis. The stockpiling of dollars began in earnest to safeguard nations from turmoil in markets, but has taken on an unproductive life of its own. In December 1997, Japan owned $300 billion in reserves, one quarter of what it does today. This buildup has altered the financial landscape in two ways: (1) Asia is essentially America’s banker, with China and Japan having the most at stake, and (2) Asia now has more cushions against market unrest than it knows what to do with.

如果日本能在另一个债务问题上采取激进的态度，那就再好不过了：日本拥有 1.2 万亿美元的货币储备。日本是美国在亚洲最亲密的盟友，长期以来一直是美元的热心买家。然而，日本却处于自 1997 年危机以来席卷亚洲的金融军备竞赛的中心。囤积美元的初衷是为了保护各国免受市场动荡的影响，但其本身却产生了无益的影响。1997 年 12 月，日本拥有 3,000 亿美元的储备，相当于今天的四分之一。这种积累从两个方面改变了金融格局：（1）亚洲基本上是美国的银行家，而中国和日本的利益最为相关；（2）亚洲现在拥有更多的缓冲资金来抵御市场动荡，而它自己却不知道该怎么做。



The first makes Asia vulnerable to political shenanigans in Washington. In 1971, Nixon-era Treasury Secretary John Connally famously observed that “it’s our currency, but it’s your problem.” Connally couldn’t have foreseen how right he would be 40-plus years on as Asia sits on $7 trillion in foreign reserve currency. Take Capitol Hill’s propensity for shooting itself—and markets—in the foot. It was a pedestrian and pointless squabble over the debt ceiling that prompted Standard & Poor’s to yank the U.S. AAA credit rating in August 2011. In the age of the Tea Party, where lawmakers think threatening to default on America’s debt is a reasonable bargaining chip, Japan, and Asia in general, needs to stop considering huge reserve holdings a financial strength. They are a trap that complicates economic policy making. It’s time the region devised an escape.

首先，亚洲容易受到华盛顿政治诡计的影响。1971 年，尼克松时代的财政部长约翰-康纳利（John Connally）说过一句名言："这是我们的货币，但却是你们的问题。康纳利不可能预料到，40 多年后，当亚洲坐拥 7 万亿美元的外汇储备货币时，他的观点是多么正确。就拿国会山自取灭亡的倾向来说吧。2011 年 8 月，标准普尔（Standard & Poor's）取消了美国的 AAA 信用评级。在茶党时代，立法者认为威胁美国债务违约是一个合理的讨价还价筹码，日本乃至整个亚洲都需要停止将持有巨额储备视为一种金融实力。它们是一个陷阱，使经济政策的制定变得更加复杂。现在是该地区想办法摆脱困境的时候了。



Why? The United States doesn’t deserve Asia’s money, not with half of its government in financial jihad mode, and damn the global consequences. The biggest economy has long taken its reserve-currency status for granted, but the events of recent days raise Washington’s hubris to entirely new levels. Chinese President Xi didn’t mention Ted Cruz, John Boehner, or the Tea Party in October 2013 when he urged major developed economies to adopt responsible policies that avoid negative spillover. He didn’t have to. Their shutdown of the U.S. government and the specter of U.S. default were written between the lines in bold type. The United States is playing with fire here in ways it might not recover from.

为什么？美国不配拥有亚洲的钱，美国政府一半的人都在进行金融圣战，其后果将不堪设想。长期以来，这个最大的经济体一直认为自己的储备货币地位是理所当然的，但最近几天发生的事件将华盛顿的傲慢提升到了全新的高度。中国国家主席习在2013年10月敦促主要发达经济体采取负责任的政策，避免负面溢出效应时，没有提及特德-克鲁兹、约翰-博纳或茶党。他没必要这么做。他们关闭美国政府和美国违约的阴影已用粗体字写在字里行间。美国正在玩火自焚，其后果可能无法挽回。



American politicians should be particularly worried about a conversation Xi had in October 2013 in Jakarta with Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono. Xi proposed creating a regional bank to invest in infrastructure in Southeast Asia and pledged funding from China. Asia is also gradually building a neighborhood International Monetary Fund. Where will all this cash come from? From Asia’s reserves, much of it currently in dollars.

2013年10月，习近平在雅加达与印尼总统苏西洛-班邦-尤多约诺（Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono）进行了一次谈话。习近平提议成立一家地区银行，投资东南亚的基础设施建设，并承诺由中国提供资金。亚洲也在逐步建立一个邻近的国际货币基金组织。这些现金从何而来？来自亚洲的储备，其中大部分目前是美元。



Asians aren’t panicking just yet. Many here think U.S. lawmakers aren’t crazy enough to default on their nation’s debt, no matter how much they despise President Barack Obama’s policies. They will bicker, close the government, and embarrass the United States on the world stage by forcing Obama to cancel visits to Asia in October 2013. In general, America’s banker, Asia, is betting bond guru Bill Gross of Pacific Investment Management Co. is right that the risk of the United States reneging on its debt is zero.

亚洲人还没有惊慌失措。这里的许多人认为，美国立法者还没有疯狂到拖欠国家债务的地步，无论他们多么鄙视巴拉克-奥巴马总统的政策。他们会争吵，关闭政府，迫使奥巴马取消2013年10月对亚洲的访问，从而在世界舞台上令美国难堪。总的来说，美国的银行家--亚洲，正在打赌太平洋投资管理公司的债券大师比尔-格罗斯（Bill Gross）是对的，美国背弃债务的风险为零。



Is this a rational view? I’m not so sure. It’s a bit surreal being an American journalist abroad these days as the tables get turned at interviews. After a few questions from me, the interviewee will inevitably ask some variation of: “What, oh, what is going on in Washington?” What disturbs officials in Asia the most is that this battle is over providing health care to Americans. How, they ask, could half your government take a stand against what other developed nations view as a basic human right?

这种观点合理吗？我不太确定。如今，作为一名美国驻外记者，采访中的情况有点超现实。在我问了几个问题之后 被采访者不可避免地会问一些类似的问题"华盛顿到底发生了什么？"最让亚洲官员感到不安的是，这场斗争是为了向美国人提供医疗服务。他们会问，你们的一半政府怎么会反对其他发达国家视为基本人权的东西呢？



The very nature of this question is what bothers me. This battle really is a political jihad, and congressional Republicans may very well think a default is a reasonable price to pay for stopping the Affordable Care Act, which they view as the end of Western civilization. Doing that would surely accelerate the end of the dollar’s linchpin role in global commerce. But just as it takes a village to get big, history-making things done, Cruz and his friends in Congress may decide that it will take a crisis to get their way.

这个问题的本质让我感到不安。这场战争实际上是一场政治圣战，国会共和党人很可能认为违约是阻止《平价医疗法案》的合理代价，他们认为这是西方文明的终结。这样做肯定会加速美元在全球商业中关键作用的终结。但是，正如要完成创造历史的大事需要一个村子的努力一样，克鲁兹和他在国会的朋友们可能会决定需要一场危机来达到他们的目的。



Another dangerous assumption: Washington’s complacency about the primacy of its debt. Asia forgave Congress that first downgrade in 2011, prompted by Capitol Hill’s last debt ceiling skirmish. Don’t expect the region’s central banks to look kindly on Standard & Poor’s knocking the United States down another peg or Moody’s Investors Service yanking away its Aaa rating.

另一个危险的假设：华盛顿对其债务的首要地位沾沾自喜。2011 年，美国国会山的上一次债务上限争论引发了第一次降级，亚洲原谅了美国国会。不要指望亚洲各国央行会对标准普尔再次下调美国评级或穆迪投资者服务公司取消其Aaa评级抱有好感。



While Congress takes Asia’s continued support for granted partly out of smugness, it also reflects the Hobson’s choice confronting reserve managers, meaning they have no real choice. China holds $1,000 of U.S. Treasuries for each of its 1.3 billion people. If traders sensed that China was selling large blocks of them, markets would plunge, resulting in huge state losses and less growth as surging bond yields slammed American consumers. And really, what other assets could the Chinese—or Japanese, for that matter—readily buy in such incredibly large amounts in a moment? So, to avoid the biggest foreign-exchange trade in history, central banks stay in dollars.

尽管美国国会将亚洲的持续支持视为理所当然，部分原因是自以为是，但这也反映了储备管理者面临的霍布森选择，即他们没有真正的选择。中国 13 亿人口每人持有 1000 美元的美国国债。如果交易员察觉到中国正在大量抛售这些国债，市场就会暴跌，导致国家蒙受巨大损失，并由于债券收益率飙升使美国消费者受到冲击而减少经济增长。而且，中国人--或者日本人--还有什么其他资产能在瞬间轻易买入如此大量的资产呢？因此，为了避免历史上最大的外汇交易，各国央行一直使用美元。



This pyramid-scheme-like arrangement is a bit Japan-like and explains why U.S. government bonds are rallying. Think about the twisted logic of a giant flight-to-safety trade based on fears that the very country to which you are rushing may soon default. You won’t find that dynamic explained in Economics 101 textbooks. But the more the United States plays with fire with its Aaa rating, the more Asia will find an alternative. Researcher Zhang Monan at the National Development and Reform Commission surely spoke for many in Beijing in October when he said China “must” change the situation of holding “too much” U.S. debt. The Federal Reserve’s easing program is one thing. It’s quite another for lawmakers to hold U.S. finances hostage to score cheap political points in a farce that’s even drawn comments from Lady Gaga on Twitter.

这种金字塔式的安排有点像日本，也解释了为什么美国政府债券会反弹。想想看，由于担心你急于前往的国家可能很快就会违约，于是就出现了巨大的安全出逃交易，这是多么扭曲的逻辑。你不会在《经济学 101》教科书中找到这种动态的解释。但美国越是玩弄其 Aaa 评级，亚洲就越能找到替代选择。国家发展和改革委员会研究员张茉楠 10 月份在北京表示，中国 "必须 "改变持有 "过多 "美国债务的局面，这无疑代表了许多人的心声。美联储的宽松计划是一回事。立法者挟持美国财政以获得廉价政治分数的闹剧则是另一回事，这场闹剧甚至引来了Lady Gaga在Twitter上的评论。



Xi’s timing in proposing a regional bank can’t be a coincidence. Beijing is also involved in efforts to build another institution that might challenge the IMF and World Bank among the BRICS nations (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa). Filling its vaults will come at the dollar’s expense. Tea Party supporters should consider that they are helping enhance China’s soft power around the world. Although China’s currency reserve managers may have lost some sleep in late 2013, its leaders gained in global stature as they came across as serious and moderate in the face of the Washington frat-house spectacle. It’s amazing to watch my U.S. tax dollars hard at work making Communists look like capitalist heroes.

习近平提出建立地区银行的时机绝非巧合。北京也参与了金砖五国（巴西、俄罗斯、印度、中国和南非）建立另一个可能挑战国际货币基金组织和世界银行的机构的努力。充实金库将以美元为代价。茶党支持者应该考虑到，他们正在帮助提升中国在全球的软实力。尽管中国的货币储备管理者在 2013 年末可能会失眠，但中国领导人的全球地位却得到了提升，因为他们在面对华盛顿兄弟会时表现得严肃而温和。看着我的美国税款在努力让共产党人看起来像资本主义英雄，真是令人惊叹。



Sure, this arrangement gives Asia some leverage over the U.S. government, as Japan demonstrated first. Bond traders still buzz about that June day in 1997 when Japanese Prime Minister Hashimoto made a startling admission. “Actually,” he told a crowd at New York’s Columbia University, “several times in the past, we have been tempted to sell large lots of U.S. Treasuries.” One of those occasions, Hashimoto said, was during Japan’s negotiations with the United States over auto sales. Or when “the exchange rate has suffered extreme movements and the American people have done little but look at domestic issues.” Hashimoto summed things up this way: “We were very tempted on these occasions. However, in terms of fund management, we did not take the most advantageous road.”

当然，这种安排让亚洲对美国政府有了一定的影响力，日本首先证明了这一点。1997 年 6 月的一天，日本首相桥本环奈做出了惊人的承认，债券交易员至今仍对此津津乐道。"事实上，"他在纽约哥伦比亚大学对一群人说，"过去有好几次，我们都想大量抛售美国国债"。桥本说，其中一次是在日本与美国就汽车销售问题进行谈判期间。或者是在 "汇率出现剧烈波动，而美国人民除了关注国内问题之外几乎没有做什么 "的时候。桥本这样总结道："在这些情况下，我们非常动心。但是，在资金管理方面，我们没有走最有利的道路"。



It’s no coincidence that when Hillary Clinton made her maiden trip to Beijing as U.S. secretary of state in February 2009, she shelved human-rights issues in favor of debt. Her talking points focused on how the interest of the United States and China, the Group of Two, are “so intertwined” that “it would not be in China’s interest” if America couldn’t finance deficit spending to stimulate its stalled economy. Clinton may have said it best in a 2009 comment contained in cables released by WikiLeaks.org. To then–Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, Clinton said: “How do you deal toughly with your banker?”

2009 年 2 月，希拉里-克林顿以美国国务卿的身份首次访问北京，她搁置了人权问题，转而讨论债务问题，这绝非巧合。她的谈话要点集中在美国和中国，即 "二人集团 "的利益是如何 "如此紧密地交织在一起"，以至于如果美国不能为赤字开支提供资金以刺激其停滞不前的经济，"就不符合中国的利益"。克林顿在维基解密网站（WikiLeaks.org）公布的一份电报中发表的 2009 年评论可能说得最好。克林顿对时任澳大利亚总理陆克文说"你如何强硬地对待你的银行家？"



The United States might want to take a page from Japan and rethink its debt structure. What the Obama administration should ask is if it still makes sense for any major economy such as the United States to export more than 50 percent of its IOUs. Isn’t there merit to countries building bigger domestic customer bases for their debt? Shouldn’t they be more, well, Japanese?

美国不妨借鉴日本的做法，重新思考其债务结构。奥巴马政府应该问的是，对美国这样的主要经济体来说，出口超过50%的欠条是否仍然有意义？各国为其债务建立更大的国内客户基础难道没有好处吗？难道它们不应该更像日本吗？



This mere suggestion will strike the free-market fundamentalists as blasphemous, and it wouldn’t be easy to do, anyway. Reversing financial globalization “would be akin to persuading a billion people not to use Facebook,” says IMF head Christine Lagarde. Yet there are obvious ways in which nations, including the United States, might profit from a more Japan-style debt arrangement. In his 2012 book, The New Depression, economist Richard Duncan builds a compelling case for another Franklin D. Roosevelt–like New Deal to restore U.S. growth, strengthen competitiveness, and achieve energy independence. It could be paid for by tapping the vast amounts of private-sector cash sitting on corporate balance sheets. If executives sensed they were investing in future economic growth and profit potential, they might pull money out of tax havens and buy more Treasuries.

仅仅是这个建议就会让自由市场原教旨主义者感到亵渎神灵，而且无论如何这都不容易做到。国际货币基金组织（IMF）总裁克里斯蒂娜-拉加德（Christine Lagarde）说，扭转金融全球化 "就好比说服十亿人不要使用 Facebook"。然而，包括美国在内的国家可以通过一些显而易见的方式从日本式的债务安排中获益。经济学家理查德-邓肯（Richard Duncan）在2012年出版的《新萧条》（The New Depression）一书中，提出了另一个类似富兰克林-罗斯福新政（Franklin D. Roosevelt-like New Deal）的令人信服的理由，以恢复美国的经济增长、增强竞争力并实现能源独立。这可以通过动用企业资产负债表上的大量私营部门现金来支付。如果高管们意识到他们在投资未来的经济增长和利润潜力，他们可能会从避税天堂撤出资金，购买更多的国债。



That’s a longer-term discussion, of course. At the moment, the United States maintains considerable leverage. Were Tokyo to announce big Treasury sales, markets would quake, the yen would surge, and Tokyo’s debt managers would have to explain the billions of dollars they just lost in the chaos. Finance Minister Taro Aso would both cannibalize Japan’s economic prospects and find himself squarely in the hot seat when called before parliament.

当然，这是一个长期的讨论。目前，美国保持着相当大的影响力。如果东京宣布大举抛售国债，市场将震荡，日元将飙升，东京的债务管理者将不得不解释他们刚刚在混乱中损失的数十亿美元。财务大臣麻生太郎既会破坏日本的经济前景，又会在被传唤到国会时处于风口浪尖。



The same goes for China, by far America’s top financier with more than $1.3 trillion in dollar holdings. Washington’s banker in chief, Chinese President Xi, is charged with overhauling China’s $8.3 trillion economy. The balancing act facing Xi and Premier Li essentially calls for them to turn the entire economy upside-down on a scale that’s never been tried before. Every economist understands why China must move beyond sweatshops and smokestacks to create jobs based more on ideas and innovation. The problem is a transition period that will be as destabilizing as it is unpredictable.

中国也是如此，迄今为止，中国是美国最大的金融家，持有超过 1.3 万亿美元的美元。华盛顿的首席银行家、中国国家主席习近平负责全面改革中国 8.3 万亿美元的经济。习近平和李克强总理面临的平衡之举实质上要求他们以前所未有的规模颠覆整个经济。每一位经济学家都明白，为什么中国必须超越血汗工厂和烟囱，更多地依靠创意和创新来创造就业机会。问题在于，转型期将是一个既不稳定又不可预测的时期。



The only way to maintain stability is maintaining a reasonable amount of growth, which in China’s case means at least 7 percent. The Communist Party’s social contract with its 1.3 billion people is simple: We raise your living standards and you don’t head to Tiananmen Square with protest banners or take to the Internet with grievances. For China, than means keeping the export engine alive and well, and padding incomes for as long as possible. That means China can no more afford a jump in U.S. yields that would unnerve the American consumer than could Japan. China would cannibalize its economic prospects by curtailing its U.S. debt purchases.

保持稳定的唯一方法就是保持合理的增长，对中国而言，这意味着至少 7%。共产党与 13 亿人民的社会契约很简单：我们提高你们的生活水平，但你们不能拉着横幅去天安门广场抗议，也不能在互联网上发泄不满。对中国来说，这意味着保持出口引擎的活力和良好状态，并尽可能长时间地增加收入。这意味着，中国与日本一样，无法承受美国收益率的飙升给美国消费者带来的不安。如果中国减少购买美债，将损害其经济前景。



“While they’re sure to make some loud noises about it, at the end of the day, they understand they have no option but to accept the hand they’re given,” says Leland Miller, president of China Beige Book International, a New York–based firm that does a quarterly survey of thousands of businesses across the most populous nation.

"总部位于纽约的中国国际经济景气指数公司（China Beige Book International）每季度都会对这个人口最多的国家的数千家企业进行调查，该公司总裁利兰-米勒（Leland Miller）说："虽然他们肯定会大声疾呼，但归根结底，他们明白自己别无选择，只能接受别人给他们的这只手。



Japan faces a similar catch-22. Given its fiscal constraints, bringing a few hundred billion dollars back to Japan here and there could be used for infrastructure, education, research and development on cleaner energy, or any other vital investments in the future. But a key pillar of Abe’s plan to end deflation is a weaker yen, and the policy has already reaped some benefits for corporate Japan as even down-and-out Sony Corp. is eking out some profits. The yen would surge if markets got wind Japan was dumping dollars.

日本也面临着类似的困境。考虑到日本财政拮据，如果能在这里或那里将几千亿美元带回日本，就可以用于基础设施、教育、清洁能源研发或未来的其他重要投资。但是，安倍晋三结束通货紧缩计划的一个关键支柱是日元走软，而这一政策已经为日本企业带来了一些好处，就连一蹶不振的索尼公司（Sony Corp.）也正在勉强赚取一些利润。如果市场听说日本在抛售美元，日元就会飙升。



Smaller economies might be able to pull that off. There would be a clear first-mover advantage for, say, South Korea (with $51 billion in Treasuries), the Philippines ($39 billion), or Malaysia ($12 billion). Each could try to sell dollars on the sly, but not bigger dollar holders in our hyperconnected, 24/7-news-cycle world; news of sizable dollar sales by, say, China or Japan would devastate world markets and drive up interest rates.

规模较小的经济体或许可以做到这一点。例如，韩国（拥有 510 亿美元的国债）、菲律宾（390 亿美元）或马来西亚（120 亿美元）将具有明显的先发优势。每个经济体都可以尝试偷偷抛售美元，但在我们这个超级互联、全天候新闻周期的世界里，更大的美元持有者不会这样做；中国或日本等国抛售大量美元的消息将对世界市场造成毁灭性打击，并推高利率。



Still, Japan and the rest of Asia should stop feeding their dollar addiction and consider ways to bring more of those funds home. Never before has the world seen a greater misallocation of vast resources. And it’s pure short-termism. Loading up on Treasuries helps Asia’s exporters by holding down local currencies, but it causes economic control problems. When central banks buy dollars, they need to sell local currency, increasing its availability and boosting the money supply. So they sell bonds to mop up excess money. It’s an imprecise science made even more complicated by the Fed’s quantitative-easing policies.

不过，日本和亚洲其他国家应停止沉迷美元，考虑如何将更多资金带回国内。世界上从未出现过如此严重的巨大资源错配现象。这纯粹是短期行为。大量购买国债可以通过压低当地货币来帮助亚洲的出口商，但却造成了经济控制问题。当央行买入美元时，他们需要卖出本币，增加本币的供应量，提高货币供应量。因此，央行需要出售债券来消化多余的货币。这是一门不精确的科学，美联储的量化宽松政策使其变得更加复杂。



Asia has mulled ways to shield itself from the kinds of shenanigans in Washington of which Connally warned before. The first serious one was a 1997–1998 effort to create an Asian monetary fund, a kind of regional IMF. When Thailand, Indonesia, and Korea turned to the IMF for about $100 billion of bailout packages, the payouts came with myriad ill-conceived and overbearing demands for austerity on the part of governments that made the crisis worse. Governments were expected to cut spending to reduce budget deficits, raise interest rates to support currencies, and let weak banks and companies fail. It was akin to yelling “Fire!” in a crowded theater.

康纳利以前曾警告过，亚洲要想方设法使自己免受华盛顿诡计的影响。第一个认真的办法是在 1997-1998 年间建立一个亚洲货币基金，一种地区性的国际货币基金组织。当泰国、印尼和韩国向国际货币基金组织寻求约1000亿美元的一揽子救助计划时，支付的同时却对各国政府提出了无数考虑不周、盛气凌人的紧缩要求，使危机雪上加霜。各国政府被要求削减开支以减少预算赤字，提高利率以支持货币，任由弱小的银行和公司倒闭。这无异于在拥挤的剧院里大喊 "着火了！"。



The conditions that the IMF imposed on Asia had the fingerprints of Robert Rubin, Lawrence Summers, and Timothy Geithner, then–assistant secretary for international affairs. Kuroda was among those urging the creation of Asia’s own bailout fund that would offer embattled economies breathing room with fewer strings attached. U.S. officials were apoplectic. They worried Asia’s monetary fund would eclipse the IMF’s influence and, by extension, America’s say in how Asia retooled economies, which could prove dangerous.

国际货币基金组织强加给亚洲的条件有罗伯特-鲁宾、劳伦斯-萨默斯和时任国际事务助理国务卿蒂莫西-盖特纳的指纹。黑田东彦是敦促建立亚洲自己的救助基金的人之一，该基金将为陷入困境的经济体提供喘息空间，并减少附加条件。美国官员对此大为光火。他们担心亚洲的货币基金会削弱国际货币基金组织的影响力，进而削弱美国在亚洲如何调整经济方面的发言权，这可能会很危险。



In May 2011, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, together with Japan, China, and South Korea, agreed on terms for the so-called Chiang Mai Initiative to pool funds to aid economies in times of trouble. Initially, its size was $120 billion. In 2012, it was doubled to $249 billion. Part of the impetus was irritation over America’s generous Wall Street bailouts in 2008 and Europe’s giant aid packages in 2012. It didn’t escape Asian policy makers that the U.S. Treasury employed just about every tactic it refused to let Asia employ in the late 1990s, including bailing out banks. Nor did Asians miss how the IMF coddled Europe with generous amounts of aid and patience. The end justifies the means, though. It’s wise for Asia to bring more of its savings back to the region.

2011 年 5 月，东南亚国家联盟与日本、中国和韩国就所谓的 "清迈倡议 "的条款达成一致，以汇集资金，在经济遇到困难时提供援助。最初，该倡议的规模为 1 200 亿美元。2012 年，规模翻了一番，达到 2,490 亿美元。推动这一倡议的部分原因是对美国 2008 年慷慨救助华尔街和欧洲 2012 年巨额援助计划的不满。亚洲的政策制定者们并没有忘记，美国财政部几乎采用了上世纪90年代末拒绝亚洲采用的所有策略，包括救助银行。亚洲人也没有注意到国际货币基金组织是如何以慷慨的援助和耐心来溺爱欧洲的。不过，目的就是手段。亚洲将更多储蓄带回本地区是明智之举。



One way Japan could do that is to start a sovereign wealth fund that could make far more productive use of state wealth. The demands that an aging population will place on the national budget are reason enough to get a better return on investment than low-yielding U.S. debt. Prudent sovereign-wealth-fund investments that generate steady returns also would negate the need for growth-slamming consumption and payroll taxes.

日本可以做到这一点的方法之一是建立主权财富基金，该基金可以更有效地利用国家财富。人口老龄化对国家预算的要求足以让我们获得比低收益美债更好的投资回报。谨慎的主权财富基金投资能够带来稳定的回报，这也将消除对刺激经济增长的消费税和工资税的需求。



The temptation, of course, would be to use such a fund domestically to prop up stocks in times of turmoil, so-called price-keeping operations. Tokyo used that strategy in the early 1990s after the collapse of its bubble economy. Many speculated it employed similar measures during the banking crisis of the early 2000s. All this would prove counterproductive if sovereign-wealth managers saw their role as propping up equities. To avoid that, strict codes of conduct would need to be devised.

当然，在国内使用这种基金在动荡时期支撑股票，即所谓的价格维持行动，也是一种诱惑。东京曾在 20 世纪 90 年代初泡沫经济崩溃后使用过这种策略。许多人猜测，东京在 2000 年代初的银行业危机中也采取了类似的措施。如果主权财富管理公司认为他们的作用是支撑股票，那么所有这一切都会适得其反。为了避免这种情况，需要制定严格的行为准则。



Perhaps the best reason for Asia to kick the currency-reserves habit is to escape another: an obsession with weak exchange rates. Here, Japan is a cautionary tale for a region that exerts an exorbitant amount of time, energy, and resources supporting exporters. Officials in Tokyo would be wise to consider something that Paul O’Neill said more than a decade ago. U.S. President George W. Bush’s first Treasury secretary angered exporters when he said good chief executive officers don’t live and die by exchange rates—they innovate around them. O’Neill, who had previously run aluminum giant Alcoa Inc. for 13 years, said the best CEOs adapt and move on.

亚洲摆脱货币储备习惯的最好理由或许是摆脱另一个理由：对疲软汇率的痴迷。在这方面，日本是一个值得警惕的例子，因为该地区花费了大量的时间、精力和资源来支持出口商。东京的官员们最好考虑一下保罗-奥尼尔十多年前说过的话。美国总统乔治-W-布什的第一任财政部长说，好的首席执行官不会因汇率而生，也不会因汇率而死，他们会围绕汇率进行创新，他的这句话激怒了出口商。奥尼尔曾在铝业巨头美国铝业公司（Alcoa Inc.



That, after all, has been the experience of modern Germany. Japan’s failure to understand O’Neil’s point and embrace it more than 20 years after its asset bubble burst is a failure from which other economies can learn. Japan’s obsession with a weaker yen is playing anew as Abe attempts to end deflation once and for all. Yet Tokyo’s currency fetish holds the economy back in the long run. It’s a short-term Band Aid, not a long-term cure for what ails the $6 trillion economy. The inordinate amount of time and energy Japan spends guiding the currency also tarnishes its capitalist credentials and has world markets fretting about a return to the so-called currency wars.

这毕竟是现代德国的经验。日本在资产泡沫破灭 20 多年后仍未能理解并接受奥尼尔的观点，这是其他经济体可以借鉴的失败教训。随着安倍晋三试图一劳永逸地结束通货紧缩，日本对弱势日元的痴迷正在重新上演。然而，从长远来看，东京的货币迷信会阻碍经济发展。这只是短期的 "创可贴"，而不是治疗 6 万亿美元经济疾病的长期良方。日本花费了过多的时间和精力来引导货币，这也玷污了其资本主义信誉，并让世界市场担心所谓的货币战争会卷土重来。



It’s also a key reason Japan is sliding on competiveness league tables around the globe. Carmakers and electronics exporters should spend more time streamlining their business and focusing on research and development and less on blaming exchange rates. The consistent search for ever-more corporate welfare hasn’t served Japan well. Exchange rates and monetary policy are important levers, but they shouldn’t be used to delay fiscal or corporate reforms. It’s another example of how Tokyo is still treating the symptoms of its malaise rather than the underlying disease. It’s a lesson economies the world over should heed: If you rely too much on exchange rates as a growth strategy, you are doing more to hide your weaknesses than fix them.

这也是日本在全球竞争力排行榜上下滑的一个重要原因。汽车制造商和电子产品出口商应该把更多的时间花在精简业务和专注研发上，而不是指责汇率。一味追求更多的企业福利对日本并无益处。汇率和货币政策是重要的杠杆，但不应被用来拖延财政或企业改革。这是东京仍在治标不治本的又一个例子。全世界的经济体都应吸取这一教训：如果过度依赖汇率作为增长战略，那么你所做的更多是掩盖自己的弱点，而不是弥补它们。





What is a strong currency, other than a sign of confidence in your economy? Capital flows brought on by rising exchange rates boost equities and lower bond yields, giving companies more latitude to raise funds and benefiting Asia’s rising middle-class. Yet even highly developed Japan is stuck in the emerging-nation mind-set that no good can come of a rising currency.

除了表明对本国经济的信心之外，强势货币还有什么意义？汇率上升带来的资本流动推动了股市上涨，降低了债券收益率，为企业融资提供了更大的空间，并使亚洲日益壮大的中产阶级从中受益。然而，即使是高度发达的日本也还停留在新兴国家的思维模式中，认为货币升值不会带来任何好处。



Japan raised currency manipulation to an art form in the 1990s and 2000s. In fact, those efforts even produced a bona fide financial celebrity in the form of Eisuke Sakakibara, a former Ministry of Finance (MOF) official (1997–1999), known as “Mr. Yen.” With a snap of his fingers, Sakakibara could scare currency traders into driving the yen lower. Those snaps were backed up by the most sophisticated currency-invention apparatus world markets had ever seen. The overwhelming force the MOF would bring to bear left markets positively traumatized. MOF officials would continue honing that skill for many years to come.

20 世纪 90 年代和 2000 年代，日本将货币操纵提升到了一种艺术形式。事实上，这些努力甚至造就了一位真正的金融名人，他就是被称为 "日元先生 "的前大藏省官员榊原英辅（Eisuke Sakakibara，1997-1999 年）。榊原动动手指，就能吓得货币交易员将日元推低。而这些弹指一挥间的背后，是世界市场有史以来最复杂的货币干预机制。日本外务省带来的压倒性力量给市场造成了严重创伤。在未来的许多年里，日本外务省官员将继续磨练这一技能。



Yet little attention is paid to how this yen obsession made Japan’s malaise worse. In the years immediately following 1989, the top tick of Japan’s bubble economy, bold action was needed to rid banks of bad loans and encourage deadbeat companies to restructure and sell off unprofitable businesses and increase productivity to raise Japan’s competitive game. Instead, the government enabled banks and companies to muddle along with what amounted to massive corporate subsidies.

然而，人们很少关注这种对日元的痴迷是如何使日本的萎靡不振雪上加霜的。1989 年是日本泡沫经济的顶点，在紧接着的几年里，需要采取大胆的行动来消除银行的不良贷款，鼓励不景气的公司进行重组，出售无利可图的业务，提高生产率，以增强日本的竞争力。相反，政府却通过相当于大规模企业补贴的方式，让银行和公司得过且过。



Take the events of 2003, when Tokyo deployed a record 20.4 trillion yen to cap the yen. In the first three months of 2004, it spent another 14.8 trillion yen. In a 15-month period, Japan poured roughly the annual GDP of Taiwan into currency markets to get its way. Those efforts were a huge boon to giant exporters like Toyota Motor Corp., Honda Motor Co., and Nissan Motor Co. Aggressive yen intervention lowered the cost of Toyota pickups, Honda sport-utility vehicles, and Nissan sedans in key foreign markets like the United States, boosted companies’ research and development efforts, and pumped up profits as they were repatriated back to Japan.

以 2003 年的事件为例，当时东京创纪录地动用了 20.4 万亿日元来压制日元。2004 年前三个月，东京又花费了 14.8 万亿日元。在 15 个月的时间里，日本向货币市场投入了大约相当于台湾全年国内生产总值的资金，以达到自己的目的。这些努力为丰田汽车公司、本田汽车公司和日产汽车公司等巨型出口商带来了巨大的好处。积极的日元干预降低了丰田皮卡、本田运动型多用途车和日产轿车在美国等主要海外市场的成本，促进了公司的研发工作，并在利润汇回日本后大幅增加。



This all-gain-no-pain exercise is still playing out nine years later. Kuroda’s first act as central bank governor was reminding traders who’s boss with an unprecedented yen onslaught. By doubling the money base and keeping the bond market imbibed with steady shots of liquidity, Kuroda sent the yen spiraling lower and Japan Inc.’s spirits soaring in the opposite direction.

这种只赚不赔的做法九年后仍在上演。黑田东彦担任央行行长的第一件事，就是以前所未有的日元攻势提醒交易员谁才是老大。黑田东彦将货币基础翻了一番，并不断向债券市场注入流动性，从而使日元急剧走低，日本公司的精神也朝着相反的方向飞扬。



The smile on Kazuo Hirai’s face two months later showed why the yen’s drop below 100-to-the-dollar is as much a curse for Japan as a blessing. By mid-May 2013, the Sony chief executive officer was mugging for the camera as his beleaguered giant produced its first profit in years—43 billion yen for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2013. Yet how an executive pulls off an impressive feat can be just as important as the achievement itself. No, the company that once redefined consumer electronics with the transistor radio and the Walkman didn’t suddenly dream up a new gadget better than Apple Inc.’s iPhone, iPad, or iPod. Nor had Sony raised productivity, halted dangerous infighting between departments, or cut costs and staff to compete in an increasingly dynamic marketplace. All Sony did was sit back and enjoy the benefits of the yen’s 20 percent plunge since November 2012—and waste time.

两个月后，平井一夫脸上的笑容表明，日元兑美元汇率跌破 100 点，对日本来说既是祸也是福。到 2013 年 5 月中旬，这位索尼公司的首席执行官在镜头前笑得合不拢嘴，因为他领导的索尼公司在截至 2013 年 3 月 31 日的财年中实现了多年来的首次盈利--430 亿日元。然而，一位高管如何完成令人印象深刻的壮举可能与成就本身同样重要。不，这家曾经用晶体管收音机和随身听重新定义消费电子产品的公司，并没有突然梦想出比苹果公司的 iPhone、iPad 或 iPod 更好的新玩意儿。索尼也没有提高生产率，停止部门间危险的内讧，或削减成本和员工，以在日益活跃的市场中竞争。索尼所做的只是坐享日元自 2012 年 11 月以来暴跌 20% 带来的好处--浪费时间。



Just when you thought Sony couldn’t be any more distracted, the company comes up with the “SmartWig.” Just because your gizmo designers make a hairpiece that aims to help its wearer navigate roads, check blood pressure, flip through slides in a presentation, or perhaps even take photos doesn’t mean a company should admit it, never mind seek a U.S. patent. I can see the marketing slogan now: “The high-tech wig that will make you wish you were bald!”

就在你以为索尼公司再也不能分心的时候，该公司又推出了 "智能假发"。仅仅因为你的小发明设计师设计了一款发饰，可以帮助佩戴者导航道路、检测血压、翻阅演示文稿中的幻灯片，甚至可以拍照，并不意味着公司应该承认这一点，更不用说申请美国专利了。我现在就能看到它的营销口号"高科技假发，让你希望自己是个秃子！"



If this is just a ruse for some bored Sony staffers to win an Ig Nobel Prize, then fine. This American parody of the Nobel Prizes, which honors 10 odd and trivial advances annually that do more to inspire laughter than serve humankind, is quite a phenomenon in Japan. Winners, like the Japanese researchers honored this year for using mice to study how opera affects heart-transplant patients, often become local celebrities.

如果这只是一些无聊的索尼员工想获得 Ig 诺贝尔奖的诡计，那也没什么。这个美国人模仿诺贝尔奖的奖项每年颁发 10 项稀奇古怪、微不足道的进展，这些进展更多的是激发人们的笑声，而不是为人类服务。像今年因利用小鼠研究歌剧如何影响心脏移植患者而获奖的日本研究人员，往往会成为当地的名人。



But Sony seems too serious for comfort about its high-tech toupee. While Sony hasn’t decided whether to commercialize this new technology, the publicity surrounding patent applications is often a trial balloon to see what the marketplace thinks. Analysts didn’t miss a beat, instantly framing the wig as Sony’s less-than-impressive answer to its competitors’ wearable-technology products—from Google’s eyeglasses, to Samsung’s smart watches, to Apple’s, well, everything.

不过，索尼对其高科技假发的态度似乎过于严肃。虽然索尼还没有决定是否将这项新技术商业化，但围绕专利申请的宣传往往是一个试探市场想法的气球。分析师们不失时机地将这顶假发归结为索尼对竞争对手的可穿戴技术产品--从谷歌的眼镜、三星的智能手表到苹果的一切产品--的不太令人印象深刻的回应。



This is no time for Sony to be dropping hints about a product that inspires only eye-rolling. The mockery is but the latest reminder that Hirai may have been a bad choice to restore Sony to relevance. It’s easy to forget there was elation when Hirai replaced Howard Stringer in April 2012. Whereas Stringer, Sony’s first non-Japanese leader, was a businessman brought in to trim fat and shake up Sony’s insular culture, Hirai was a gadget man: a bona fide star in the tech community.

现在不是索尼暗示要推出一款只会让人瞠目结舌的产品的时候。这种嘲讽只是最新的提醒，平井一夫可能是索尼重振雄风的错误选择。人们很容易忘记，2012 年 4 月平井一夫接替霍华德-斯金格（Howard Stringer）时，市场曾一片欢腾。斯金格是索尼的第一位非日本籍领导人，他是一位商人，上任的目的是减掉肥肉，撼动索尼封闭的文化，而平井一夫则是一位小玩意儿达人：科技界名副其实的明星。



The real problem isn’t Hirai. It’s that Sony died years ago. The company goes through the motions and churns out new music players, flat-screen televisions, smartphones, and video-game players, but who cares? With each ho-hum product, Sony makes us nostalgic for the powerhouse that changed the world with the Walkman. It’s been 13 years since Steve Jobs ushered in a new revolution with Apple’s iPod, and Sony still hasn’t come out with a globally viable competitor, never mind a rival to the iPhone or iPad. The remarkable thing is that Sony has what Apple sorely lacks: vast libraries of content, both music and films. And still Sony let Samsung, too, steal away its franchise. Its credit rating is spiraling toward junk.

真正的问题不在于平井。而是索尼多年前就已经死了。索尼公司敷衍了事，不断推出新的音乐播放器、平板电视、智能手机和视频游戏机，但又有谁在乎呢？索尼每推出一款平淡无奇的产品，都会让我们怀念那个用随身听改变世界的强大公司。自从史蒂夫-乔布斯（Steve Jobs）用苹果的 iPod 带来一场新的革命以来，已经过去了 13 年，索尼仍未推出一款在全球范围内具有竞争力的产品，更不用说与 iPhone 或 iPad 竞争了。难能可贵的是，索尼拥有苹果非常缺乏的东西：庞大的内容库，包括音乐和电影。但索尼还是让三星抢走了它的专营权。它的信用评级正在向垃圾级飙升。



What Sony and many investors don’t get is that it’s no longer an electronics company. Hedge fund manager Daniel Loeb of New York–based Third Point somehow missed that fact in May when he called on Sony to dump large chunks of its entertainment business and focus on electronics. Sony should be doing the opposite. It is to electronics what Microsoft is to the computer industry: a pulseless shell of its once-dynamic self.

索尼和许多投资者不明白的是，索尼已不再是一家电子产品公司。今年 5 月，纽约 Third Point 公司的对冲基金经理丹尼尔-勒布（Daniel Loeb）呼吁索尼抛售大部分娱乐业务，专注于电子产品，但他不知为何忽略了这一事实。索尼应该反其道而行之。索尼在电子产品领域的地位就像微软在计算机行业的地位一样：曾经充满活力的索尼已经变成了一具毫无生气的躯壳。



All this explains why word of the SmartWig is such a buzz killer, not to mention potentially creepy. Japanese police are busy enough now chasing middle-age men sneaking naughty photos of schoolgirls. (Yeah, a hairpiece camera will really help that effort.) The bigger issue is what this says about Sony’s mind-set. Sony needs to wow us all over again—to shock the world with a game-changer that has the folks at Apple, Samsung, and Wired magazine huddled around TVs (not Sony’s, of course) taking in breathless news reports about its next revolutionary idea. Maybe I’m splitting hairs, but all SmartWig may do is win an Ig Nobel.

所有这一切都解释了为什么智能假发的消息会如此蛊惑人心，更不用说可能会令人毛骨悚然了。日本警方现在正忙于追捕偷拍女学生猥亵照的中年男子（是啊，戴假发的相机确实能帮上大忙）。更重要的问题是，这说明了索尼的心态。索尼需要再次让我们惊叹--以改变游戏规则的方式震撼世界，让苹果、三星和《连线》杂志的人都围在电视机旁（当然不是索尼的电视机），屏息聆听关于索尼下一个革命性想法的新闻报道。也许我说得有点过了，但智能假发所能做的也许只是赢得一个伊格诺贝尔奖。



Kuroda’s handiwork is taking the onus off Hirai and the rest of Japan Inc. to claw their way back through innovation and improved efficiency. Sony is emblematic of why Ezra Vogel’s “Japan as Number One” argument in 1979 didn’t work out so well. Akio Morita and Masaru Ibuka founded it amid the rubble of 1946. Their fabled success was a cornerstone of Japan’s post–World War II resurgence. What many Americans feel about Henry Ford or Steve Jobs, Japanese think of the fathers of Sony. Morita’s 1986 autobiography, Made in Japan, was a bestseller, as was the 1991 book he co-authored with politician Shintaro Ishihara, The Japan That Can Say No.

黑田的工作让平井一夫和日本公司的其他成员不再有责任通过创新和提高效率来扳回劣势。索尼公司是埃兹拉-沃格尔（Ezra Vogel）1979 年提出的 "日本第一 "论点未能取得成功的象征。盛田昭夫和井塚正治是在 1946 年的一片废墟中创立索尼的。他们神话般的成功是日本二战后复兴的基石。就像许多美国人对亨利-福特或史蒂夫-乔布斯的印象一样，日本人对索尼之父的印象也是如此。森田1986年出版的自传《日本制造》是一本畅销书，1991年他与政治家石原慎太郎合著的《能说不的日本》也是一本畅销书。



Then Sony, much like the national economy, grew complacent and lost its way. Moving from the rapid expansion and ballooning profits to a less-stellar growth environment proved difficult. After Japan’s 1980s asset bubble burst, the once-formidable Sony found itself bloated, sitting on too much debt and devoid of the creative spirit that once revolutionized entire industries. Sony is now a microcosm of Japan’s present—embattled on all sides by rising, nimble, and low-cost rivals.

后来，索尼也像国家经济一样，逐渐自满，迷失了方向。从快速扩张和利润膨胀到增长乏力的环境，索尼举步维艰。20 世纪 80 年代日本资产泡沫破灭后，曾经强大的索尼发现自己已经臃肿不堪、负债累累，而且缺乏曾经为整个行业带来革命性变化的创新精神。索尼现在是日本现在的一个缩影--四面受敌，对手崛起、灵活、成本低廉。



Now that Abe and Kuroda are easing Sony’s pain with a weaker yen, will Hirai push ahead to streamline his company and stop rivals like Korea’s Samsung Electronics Co. from stealing its franchise? Or will Sony, Sharp Corp., and Nissan see a weaker yen as an all-clear sign to throttle back and stop reinventing themselves? Only time will tell, but a look at Japan’s history these last 20 years doesn’t offer much optimism.

既然安倍晋三和黑田东彦正在通过日元走软减轻索尼的痛苦，那么平井是否会推进公司精简，阻止韩国三星电子公司等竞争对手窃取其特许经营权？或者，索尼、夏普和日产是否会把日元走软看作是一个明确的信号，从而放慢脚步，停止自我革新？只有时间才能告诉我们答案，但纵观日本过去 20 年的历史，我们并不乐观。





A weak yen has other drawbacks, too. One is Japan’s fast-growing need for energy with all but a small handful of the 54 nuclear reactors offline since the March 2011 earthquake and radiation crisis in Fukushima. That means resource-starved Japan has to buy more and more oil, coal, and gas from overseas. Abe’s travel itinerary tells the story. An increasing number of his overseas trips are to energy-rich nations. The upshot is that Japan is beginning to have some inflation about which to boast, but it’s the bad kind. That will undermine Abenomics, as higher energy costs are passed on to consumers. If the government saw fit to subsidize households and business, Japan’s fiscal trajectory would grow even uglier.

日元疲软也有其他弊端。其一是日本对能源的需求快速增长，自 2011 年 3 月福岛地震和辐射危机以来，日本的 54 座核反应堆除极少数外全部停运。这意味着资源匮乏的日本不得不从海外购买越来越多的石油、煤炭和天然气。安倍晋三的旅行日程就说明了这一点。他越来越多地出访能源丰富的国家。其结果是，日本开始出现一些值得夸耀的通货膨胀，但却是不好的那种。这将破坏安倍经济学，因为更高的能源成本会转嫁到消费者身上。如果政府认为有必要补贴家庭和企业，日本的财政轨迹将变得更加丑陋。



Geopolitics is another flashpoint. Japanese officials work the phones to keep other Group of Seven members from publicly rebuking its yen policies. The pitch is, if you want our economy to become a growth engine in the long run, a lower yen is the price in the short run. But we no longer live in a G-7 world, but a Group of 20 world. Key G-20 powers, China included, won’t sit idly by as wealthy Japan devalues its way to greater prosperity. As China’s restructuring efforts slam GDP, officials in Beijing may devalue, too, taking political cover in Abe’s own efforts.

地缘政治是另一个热点。日本官员通过电话阻止七国集团其他成员公开指责其日元政策。他们的口号是，如果想让我们的经济在长期内成为增长引擎，那么在短期内降低日元就是代价。但我们不再生活在七国集团的世界里，而是生活在二十国集团的世界里。包括中国在内的 20 国集团主要大国不会坐视富裕的日本通过贬值实现更大繁荣。随着中国的结构调整努力对国内生产总值造成冲击，北京的官员也可能贬值，为安倍晋三自己的努力提供政治掩护。



Developing Asia must avoid Japan’s fate. What officials in Tokyo see as savvy economic planning and crisis management, their peers around the region should see for what they really are: delaying tactics. A key failure of Abenomics so far is failing to inspire corporate executives to invest, expand, and fatten paychecks in a way that prompts households to save less and spend more. The evidence so far suggests that the weak yen has been a boon for corporate profits, but corporate executives aren’t returning the favor. Getting companies to share profits by upping wages and boosting research-and-development budgets is a cornerstone of Abe’s strategy. He’s going to have to work harder and faster to spark that virtuous cycle—Asia, too.

亚洲发展中国家必须避免日本的命运。东京的官员们认为这是精明的经济规划和危机管理，但该地区的同行们应该看到其真正的本质：拖延战术。迄今为止，安倍经济学的一个主要失误是未能激励企业高管进行投资、扩张和提高薪酬，从而促使家庭减少储蓄和增加支出。迄今为止的证据表明，日元疲软给企业利润带来了好处，但企业高管却没有回报。通过提高工资和增加研发预算让企业分享利润是安倍战略的基石。他必须更加努力、更加快速地工作，以启动这一良性循环--亚洲也是如此。



The volatility seen in Asia in 2013 is a stark reminder that the region has come a long way from 1997, but not far enough. The speed with which investors lurched from the bullishness of Asia to negativity should be a wake-up call. Analysts were quick to explore whether Asia was on the verge of another financial meltdown, especially amid the uncertain fallout of the Fed ending its quantitative-easing program. But rather than 1997, it may make more sense to set our clocks back to 1994.

亚洲在2013年出现的波动严酷地提醒我们，亚洲与1997年相比已经取得了长足进步，但还远远不够。投资者从看好亚洲到看衰亚洲的速度之快，应该敲响警钟。分析师们迅速探讨亚洲是否正处于另一次金融崩溃的边缘，尤其是在美联储结束量化宽松计划的不确定影响下。但是，与其说是 1997 年，不如说是 1994 年。



The year 1997 lives in infamy, of course: currencies in free fall; current-account deficits exploding; central banks scrambling to calm nerves; IMF officials parachuting in. But another 1997-like crisis is highly unlikely because exchange rates are more flexible, foreign-currency debt is lower, banks are healthier, countries are sitting on trillions of dollars of reserves, and economies are far more transparent. The differences between 1997 and today trump the similarities.

1997 年当然声名狼藉：货币自由落体；经常账户赤字爆炸；各国央行争相安抚情绪；国际货币基金组织官员空降。但是，再次发生类似 1997 年危机的可能性很小，因为现在的汇率更加灵活，外币债务更低，银行更加健康，各国拥有数万亿美元的储备，经济也更加透明。1997 年与今天的不同之处压倒了相似之处。



The same can’t be said of 1994, the last time the Fed reminded the world its monetary policy is decided in Washington, not Bangkok, Jakarta, or Seoul. It also demonstrated how countries maintaining giant bond markets can experience control problems when markets spiral into turmoil. That was the year when Fed Chairman Greenspan began doubling benchmark interest rates over 12 months, causing hundreds of billions of dollars of bond-market losses and helping set 1997 in motion. The dollar’s post-1994 rally made currency pegs impossible to maintain, leading to devastating devaluations across Asia.

1994 年的情况并非如此，那是美联储最后一次提醒世界，其货币政策是在华盛顿而非曼谷、雅加达或首尔决定的。这也表明，当市场陷入动荡时，维持着巨大债券市场的国家是如何遇到控制问题的。就在这一年，美联储主席格林斯潘开始在 12 个月内将基准利率提高一倍，造成了数千亿美元的债券市场损失，并帮助启动了 1997 年。美元在 1994 年后的反弹使货币挂钩无法维持，导致整个亚洲出现毁灭性贬值。



The real problem was hubris. All that hot money coursing Asia’s way in the 1990s made rapid growth too easy. Policy makers were too busy signing foreign direct investment deals, attending ribbon-cutting ceremonies for factories and flashy skyscrapers, and congratulating themselves for surging stocks to do their real jobs. Financial systems went neglected, unproductive investments accumulated, and cronyism ran wild.

真正的问题在于自大。20 世纪 90 年代，大量热钱涌入亚洲，使得快速增长变得过于容易。决策者们忙于签署外国直接投资协议、出席工厂和华而不实的摩天大楼的剪彩仪式，以及为股票飙升而沾沾自喜，无暇顾及实际工作。金融体系被忽视，非生产性投资不断积累，裙带关系横行。



Yet, in the years leading up to 2013, a different kind of smugness afflicted Asia. Governments believed their own press that they had decoupled from the West; how they nimbly steered around the 2008 global crash; how bankers abandoned New York and London for Hong Kong and Singapore; how Asian debt became a safe haven from turmoil in Europe; of the wonders of being in China’s backyard as 1.3 billion mainlanders grow richer and drive Asian growth to new heights.

然而，在2013年之前的几年里，一种不同的自鸣得意困扰着亚洲。亚洲各国政府相信自己的媒体，相信自己已经与西方脱钩；相信自己是如何灵活地避开2008年的全球金融危机；相信银行家是如何放弃纽约和伦敦，转投香港和新加坡；相信亚洲债务是如何成为欧洲动荡的避风港；相信13亿中国大陆人日益富裕，并推动亚洲经济增长达到新的高度，而亚洲就在中国的后院，这一切都很神奇。



That’s not to say Asia doesn’t deserve a big pat on the back for its post-1997 reform efforts. But rapid growth and an impressive job surviving the global meltdown reanimated a hubris that Asia needs to own and analyze. The price of this cockiness is mounting as currencies in Indonesia, Thailand, and elsewhere suddenly seem toxic to investors. India is in chaos, at a time when China’s growth trajectory is more uncertain than it has been in 15 years.

这并不是说亚洲在 1997 年后的改革努力不值得称赞。但是，快速增长和在全球经济衰退中的出色表现重新激发了亚洲的狂妄自大，亚洲需要对这种狂妄自大进行反思和分析。随着印尼、泰国和其他国家的货币对投资者来说突然变得有毒，这种狂妄自大的代价正在增加。印度正处于混乱之中，而中国的增长轨迹比 15 年来更加不确定。



First up, we need a serious reality check on the myth of Asia decoupling from the West. Asia proved it can live without American and European consumers for four or five years, but thriving beyond that means creating more buoyant and self-supportive domestic economies. Also, if you are going to hitch your fortunes to another economy—China—it’s best if it’s not a developing one whose growth model is running out of steam. The test now, as it was in 1994, is what Asia does to modernize economies.

首先，我们需要对亚洲与西方脱钩的神话进行一次严肃的现实检验。事实证明，没有美国和欧洲消费者，亚洲也能活四五年，但要想在四五年后继续繁荣，就必须创造更有活力、更能自给自足的国内经济。此外，如果你要把自己的命运搭在另一个经济体--中国--的身上，最好不要是一个增长模式已经耗尽的发展中经济体。和 1994 年一样，现在的考验是亚洲如何实现经济现代化。



Examples of complacency abound. In Indonesia, President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono forgot political stability only goes so far if corruption and inefficiency remain rampant. In Thailand, Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra was too busy tweaking the constitution to notice a potentially disastrous bubble in household debt. In the Philippines, President Benigno Aquino forgot that 7 percent growth only matters if you create lots of jobs. In Malaysia, Prime Minister Najib Razak has been too busy celebrating his recent election victory to tend to a current account swinging toward deficit.

自满的例子比比皆是。在印度尼西亚，总统苏西洛-班邦-尤多约诺（Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono）忘记了，如果腐败和低效依然猖獗，政治稳定也只能到此为止。在泰国，英拉-西那瓦（Yingluck Shinawatra）总理忙于修改宪法，没有注意到家庭债务中潜在的灾难性泡沫。在菲律宾，总统贝尼尼奥-阿基诺忘记了，只有创造大量就业机会，7%的增长率才有意义。在马来西亚，总理纳吉布-拉扎克（Najib Razak）一直忙于庆祝他最近的选举胜利，而无暇顾及正朝着赤字方向摇摆的经常账户。



“While the United States has been given a free pass on the twin deficit issue, emerging-market countries will not be so lucky,” said Simon Grose-Hodge, head of investment strategy for South Asia at LGT Group in Singapore.

"新加坡 LGT 集团南亚投资战略主管 Simon Grose-Hodge 说："虽然美国在双赤字问题上获得了豁免，但新兴市场国家就没那么幸运了。



Take India, which has been too busy believing its own spin and relishing its status as a BRIC economy to notice the crisis brewing within its borders. Sure, the other BRIC members have their share of challenges, but none more serious than the second-most-populous nation. There was great excitement that respected economist Raghuram Rajan was tapped to helm the Reserve Bank of India in September. But the nation’s problems are largely beyond Rajan’s control. The central bank can’t save a government that is as bereft of ideas and energy as it is corrupt and inefficient. Yet Rajan is already resorting to the Japan-like strategy of intervening more and more in the bond market to soothe investors. As he joins Kuroda on the debt treadmill, Rajan will have to be careful not to get stuck there.

就拿印度来说，它一直忙于相信自己的自说自话，乐于享受金砖四国的经济地位，而没有注意到国内正在酝酿的危机。当然，"金砖四国 "的其他成员也面临着挑战，但没有一个比这个人口第二多的国家更严重。今年 9 月，备受尊敬的经济学家拉古拉姆-拉詹（Raghuram Rajan）被任命为印度储备银行行长，这让人们感到非常兴奋。但印度的问题在很大程度上超出了拉詹的控制范围。中央银行无法拯救一个既腐败又低效、缺乏想法和活力的政府。然而，拉詹已经开始采取类似日本的策略，越来越多地干预债券市场，以安抚投资者。拉詹将与黑田东彦一起踏上债务的 "跑步机"，他必须小心谨慎，以免陷入困境。



Among the reasons it’s not 1997 all over again is Japan. An underappreciated accelerator of Asia’s meltdown is that Japan’s then-shaky banking system held about $100 billion of loans to the five Asian economies hardest hit in 1997. When Japanese bankers pulled the plug, the crisis reached a fever pitch. Today, Japan Inc. is healthier than it was when Yamaichi imploded, the government is shoring up the economy, and the central bank stands ready to add new liquidity as the Fed’s tapering process unfolds. China, meanwhile, will pull out all the stops to keep growth above 7 percent. As the United States ends its quantitative easing and credit markets tighten, cash-rich China may act to fill the void as a way of upping its regional prestige and power.

1997年没有重演的原因之一是日本。亚洲经济崩溃的一个被低估的加速器是，日本当时摇摇欲坠的银行系统为 1997 年受冲击最严重的五个亚洲经济体持有约 1,000 亿美元的贷款。当日本银行家撤资时，危机达到了白热化。如今，日本公司比山一市内爆时更加健康，政府正在支撑经济，中央银行随时准备在美联储缩表进程展开时增加新的流动性。与此同时，中国将使出浑身解数，将经济增长保持在 7% 以上。随着美国结束量化宽松政策，信贷市场收紧，现金充裕的中国可能会采取行动填补空白，以此提高其地区声望和实力。



Yet as markets crack anew, Asia should remember the years it squandered between 1994 and 1997. Asia also must rethink the last few years, a period during which it should have been reducing vulnerabilities and avoiding the urge to hide its cracks, vulnerabilities, and tracks with opaque debt markets—not enjoying its headlines. This is something Japan did for way too long.

然而，当市场出现新的裂痕时，亚洲应该记住它在 1994 年至 1997 年间浪费的岁月。亚洲还必须重新思考过去的几年，在此期间，亚洲本应减少脆弱性，避免用不透明的债务市场来掩盖其裂缝、脆弱性和踪迹，而不是享受其头条新闻。这一点日本做得太久了。





Developing Asia is not without its lessons for Japan, Europe, and even the United States. Observing Greece slide into chaos from 6,000 miles away has been painful and oddly familiar. This region, after all, was the last to experience what Europe is suffering through. Asia’s crash toppled leaders, touched off riots, set back living standards a decade or more, and tarnished the IMF’s reputation. Expect similar machinations if Europe’s grand monetary experiment cracks.

发展中的亚洲并非没有给日本、欧洲甚至美国带来教训。在 6000 英里之外目睹希腊陷入混乱，既令人痛苦，又似曾相识。毕竟，这个地区是最后一个经历欧洲正在遭受的苦难的地区。亚洲的崩溃推翻了领导人，引发了骚乱，使生活水平倒退了十年或更久，并玷污了国际货币基金组织的声誉。如果欧洲的宏大货币试验出现裂痕，预计也会出现类似的阴谋。



Asia and Europe are half a world apart and it is true that the differences can be far greater than the similarities. Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, and Thailand were much less developed 15 years ago than their euro-zone counterparts are today. China had yet to emerge as a dominant manufacturing economy. The United States was in a better position to offer international assistance than it is today. With that in mind, there are five lessons Europe might learn from Asia.

亚洲和欧洲相隔半个地球，差异确实可能远远大于相似之处。15 年前，印度尼西亚、韩国、马来西亚和泰国的发达程度远不及今天的欧元区国家。中国尚未成为制造业的主导经济体。美国当时比今天更有能力提供国际援助。有鉴于此，欧洲可以从亚洲学到五条经验。



First, default may be unavoidable. Once Europe’s crisis returns, bailouts will ultimately prove futile. The Greek public has been very consistent about one thing: the belief that it bears no responsibility for all the debt its leaders took on over the last decade. If that doesn’t provide the backdrop for debt repudiation, what does?

首先，违约可能无法避免。一旦欧洲危机卷土重来，救助最终将被证明是徒劳的。希腊公众对一件事的看法非常一致：他们认为自己对其领导人在过去十年中承担的所有债务不承担任何责任。如果这还不能成为拒绝偿还债务的背景，那么还有什么能呢？



As Greece runs through the funds its European neighbors throw at it and the bond market becomes the tail wagging the proverbial dog, other dominoes will fall. We saw that in Asia after Thailand devalued the baht in July 1997. Indonesia swore up and down it wouldn’t get dragged into Thailand’s mess—until it was. Korea assured the world it would avoid an IMF aid package—until it couldn’t. The United States and Japan are near recession. As China’s rise continues to squeeze wages in uncompetitive and highly indebted Europe, bond markets could turn hostile very quickly and push France and Italy toward the cliff’s edge.

随着希腊耗尽其欧洲邻国投入的资金，债券市场成了摇尾乞怜的狗，其他多米诺骨牌也将倒下。1997 年 7 月泰国泰铢贬值后，我们在亚洲看到了这种情况。印尼信誓旦旦地保证不会被拖入泰国的泥潭--直到它被拖入了泥潭。韩国向全世界保证，它将避免接受国际货币基金组织的一揽子援助--直到它做不到。美国和日本接近衰退。随着中国的崛起不断挤压着缺乏竞争力、债台高筑的欧洲的工资水平，债券市场可能会迅速变得充满敌意，将法国和意大利推向悬崖边缘。



Second, recovery comes faster once debts are purged. Goldman Sachs’s financial creativity helped Greece fudge its way into the common currency, leaving the government in Athens with a credibility gap. When it says the country can close its budget deficit with stopgap measures, traders are right to roll their eyes and policy makers are correct in canceling their vacation plans for 2014.

其次，一旦债务得到清理，复苏就会来得更快。高盛的金融创造力帮助希腊以虚假的方式加入了共同货币，给雅典政府留下了信誉空白。当希腊政府表示可以通过权宜之计弥补预算赤字时，交易员们翻白眼是正确的，而决策者们取消2014年的度假计划也是正确的。



In December 1997, after Korea caved in and sought a $57 billion IMF bailout, it acted quickly to let weak companies fail, closed insolvent banks, clamped down on tax cheats, and came clean about the magnitude of its debts. Greece will have to continue restructuring its debt, and the fallout from this will increase pressure on Portugal, Spain, and Italy. If Greece had acted a year ago, markets might not have had to spend so much time and energy worrying about how and when a default will arrive. “Asia’s crisis showed that the quicker you deal with the root of the problem, however painful that may be, the quicker you are likely to recover from it,” said Grose-Hodge of LGT Group. “Europe could do worse than to heed that lesson.”

1997 年 12 月，在韩国屈服并寻求国际货币基金组织 570 亿美元的救助后，韩国迅速采取行动，让实力较弱的公司倒闭，关闭资不抵债的银行，打击偷税漏税行为，并公布了其债务规模。希腊将不得不继续重组其债务，由此产生的后果将增加葡萄牙、西班牙和意大利的压力。如果希腊一年前就采取行动，市场可能就不必花费如此多的时间和精力来担心违约会如何发生以及何时发生。"LGT 集团的格罗斯-霍奇说："亚洲的危机表明，越快从根本上解决问题，无论会有多大的痛苦，就可能越快从危机中恢复过来。"欧洲应该吸取这一教训。



Third, don’t forget structural reforms. In all the obsessing over debt, European leaders are taking their eyes off the need to retool in a world increasingly influenced by China. Fiscal responsibility is important, of course, but so is altering policies to make economies more nimble, competitive, and conducive to entrepreneurs who create jobs.

第三，不要忘记结构性改革。欧洲领导人在纠结于债务问题时，忽略了在一个日益受中国影响的世界中重新调整的必要性。财政责任固然重要，但改变政策使经济更灵活、更有竞争力、更有利于企业家创造就业机会也同样重要。



In the years following its crisis, Asia worked to open service sectors to competition. It also cut red tape and took steps to limit cronyism. Asia still is home to many of the world’s poor, market development is still a work in progress, and corruption is pervasive. What Asia got right is that crises can’t only be about austerity. While you’re trimming spending, you must be creative about generating new dynamism. Since euro nations can’t resort to currency devaluation to revive growth, reform is the only way.

在危机后的几年里，亚洲努力向竞争开放服务行业。亚洲还减少繁文缛节，采取措施限制任人唯亲。亚洲仍然是世界上许多穷人的家园，市场发展仍在进行之中，腐败无处不在。亚洲的正确之处在于，危机不能只与紧缩政策有关。在削减开支的同时，必须创造性地激发新的活力。由于欧元国家无法通过货币贬值来恢复增长，改革是唯一的办法。



Fourth, growth beats taxes when repairing fiscal balance. Japan is a cautionary tale when it comes to rich nations getting incentives wrong. It issued mountains of debt, assuming for 20 years that it was just one stimulus plan away from 5 percent growth. That never happened. Then, amid a ballooning budget deficit, it increased consumption taxes in 1997. That killed a nascent recovery. In the current global environment, growth is the route to balanced budgets, not higher taxes. The latter would simply destroy the former.

第四，在修复财政平衡时，增长胜于税收。说到富裕国家在激励措施上的失误，日本是一个值得警惕的例子。在长达 20 年的时间里，日本发行了堆积如山的债务，假定只需一个刺激计划就能实现 5% 的增长。但这从未实现。然后，在预算赤字不断膨胀的情况下，日本于 1997 年提高了消费税。这扼杀了复苏的萌芽。在当前的全球环境下，增长是实现预算平衡的途径，而不是提高税收。后者只会破坏前者。



Fifth, markets are quick to forgive and forget if you take the right recovery steps. Yes, there’s a heavy price to pay for going hat-in-hand to the IMF. The key will be conditionality. There’s much griping in Asia about how the terms of Europe’s IMF packages are far less stringent than those forced on Indonesia, Korea, and Thailand. Fresh starts are possible, though, as the powerful gains in Asian markets over the last 16-plus years attest. So drop the denial, Europe. Let Greece do what it needs to do, even if it means default, and move on. Asia shows there is life after crisis.

第五，如果采取正确的复苏措施，市场很快就会原谅和忘记。是的，向国际货币基金组织屈服需要付出沉重的代价。关键在于条件。在亚洲，人们对欧洲接受国际货币基金组织一揽子援助的条件远不如印尼、韩国和泰国那么苛刻怨声载道。不过，重新开始是可能的，亚洲市场在过去 16 多年中的强劲增长就证明了这一点。所以，放弃否认吧，欧洲。让希腊做它需要做的事情，即使这意味着违约，然后继续前进。亚洲表明，危机过后仍有生机。



Yet, one tax Japan should have implemented years ago is that on bond holdings. If Japanese won’t buy and hold fewer government bonds on their own, the government should incentivize them with a special tax. Really, if Japan had taxed coupon payments on government bonds 10 or 15 years ago, its banks wouldn’t be sitting on so many. If Wall Street is America’s chaebol, an outsized bond market is Japan’s. If bankers had made fresh loans instead of buying bonds, the Japanese recovery that just ended would have been more impressive.

然而，日本早在几年前就应该征收债券持有税。如果日本人自己不愿意购买和持有更少的政府债券，政府就应该通过征收特别税来激励他们。真的，如果日本在 10 年或 15 年前就对政府债券的票面支付征税，那么日本的银行就不会持有这么多债券了。如果说华尔街是美国的财阀，那么规模庞大的债券市场就是日本的财阀。如果银行家们当时提供的是新贷款而不是购买债券，那么刚刚结束的日本经济复苏就会更加令人印象深刻。



Capitalism purists would surely object, but policy makers need to work harder to direct the money they create into the real economy. Without the so-called multiplier effect that can make monetary policy so potent, zero Fed and BOJ rates won’t boost growth. The key lesson Fed officials need to learn from Japan concerns an exit strategy. Japan never had one when it began offering free money. The United States must devise one if it wants to avoid what economists call “Japan disease.” It’s never too late for officials in Tokyo to act, or Europe for that matter.

资本主义纯粹主义者肯定会反对，但政策制定者需要更加努力地将他们创造的货币导向实体经济。美联储和日本央行的零利率不会促进经济增长，而所谓的乘数效应则会使货币政策变得如此有力。美联储官员需要从日本学到的关键一课是退出策略。日本在开始提供免费货币时从未制定过退出战略。美国要想避免经济学家所说的 "日本病"，就必须制定退出战略。东京或欧洲的官员现在采取行动还为时不晚。



To economist Richard Koo of Nomura Research Institute, Europe has failed at every turn to learn from what he calls Japan’s persistent “balance-sheet recession.” Such a scenario occurs when the fallout from an asset boom that ended badly cripples companies and households with debt that must be reduced. Until it is, both companies and homeowners have little desire to borrow and spend even with historically low interest rates. Koo’s recommended solution: Offset private-sector savings with government spending, the opposite of what German Chancellor Angela Merkel and European Central Bank President Mario Draghi have been advocating in the euro-area, one in which Portugal, Spain, and others are never more than a credit downgrade away from fresh turmoil.

野村综合研究所（Nomura Research Institute）的经济学家理查德-顾（Richard Koo）认为，欧洲每次都未能从他所说的日本持续的 "资产负债表衰退 "中吸取教训。当资产繁荣以失败告终，公司和家庭负债累累，必须削减债务时，就会出现这种情况。在此之前，即使利率处于历史低位，公司和房主也没有借贷和消费的意愿。Koo 建议的解决方案是这与德国总理默克尔和欧洲央行行长马里奥-德拉吉在欧元区的主张恰恰相反，在欧元区，葡萄牙、西班牙和其他国家距离新一轮动荡只有一次信用降级。



Europe’s cash-strapped peripheral countries are suffering the economic equivalent of pneumonia, which, just like the deadly lung infection, is most convincingly beaten by ensuring ample nourishment. To Tokyo-based Koo, a former Federal Reserve economist, the cure is greater fiscal stimulus to end the euro’s confidence crisis once and for all. “The patient can have both, but the doctor has to cure the pneumonia first even if the treatments contradict those required” for other ailments, Koo said. The trouble is that “in Europe, austerity is the only game in town. When you look around Europe you see balance-sheet recessions.”

欧洲资金短缺的外围国家正在遭受相当于肺炎的经济打击，就像致命的肺部感染一样，确保充足的营养是战胜这种疾病的最有效方法。对于来自东京的前美联储经济学家 Koo 来说，治疗方法就是加大财政刺激力度，一劳永逸地结束欧元的信心危机。"Koo 说："病人可以两者兼得，但医生必须先治好肺炎，即使治疗方法与治疗其他疾病的方法相矛盾。问题在于，"在欧洲，紧缩是城里唯一的游戏。当你环顾欧洲，你会看到资产负债表的衰退"。



Europe needs to heed the lessons from Japan, which has expanded less than one percent on average in the past 20 years and suffered falling consumer prices. Koo’s views are made even more compelling considering the timeline of his career. The Taiwanese American was born in Japan in 1954 and studied at the University of California–Berkeley and Johns Hopkins University before winning a Fed fellowship. He was in Washington at the height of Ronald Reagan’s supply-side reforms, which in some ways scuttled his career plans. Koo’s hopes of staying on at the Fed in Washington ran into Reagan’s public sector hiring freeze, and he ended up at the Fed Bank of New York where he dabbled in Latin America’s debt crisis. He returned to Tokyo in 1987, at the height of Japan’s bubble economy, and had a front-row seat to one of history’s most spectacular, and some might say improbable, crashes. Through the 1990s and 2000s, Koo looked on with growing frustration as Japan’s funk set in and deepened, a process he detailed in his 2008 book, The Holy Grail of Macroeconomics: Lessons from Japan’s Great Recession. His conclusion: It’s all about the debt.

欧洲需要吸取日本的教训，因为日本在过去 20 年中的平均经济增长率不到 1%，而且消费价格不断下跌。考虑到辜胜阻的职业生涯，他的观点更有说服力。这位美籍台湾人 1954 年出生于日本，曾就读于加州大学伯克利分校和约翰霍普金斯大学，后获得美联储奖学金。他在华盛顿工作时，正值罗纳德-里根推行供给侧改革，这在某种程度上破坏了他的职业规划。Koo 希望留在华盛顿的美联储工作，但里根冻结了公共部门的招聘，最后他去了纽约联邦储备银行，在那里他涉足了拉丁美洲的债务危机。1987 年，他回到东京，当时正值日本泡沫经济的鼎盛时期，他亲眼目睹了历史上最壮观、也可以说是最不可能的经济崩溃。在 20 世纪 90 年代和 2000 年代，辜鸿铭目睹了日本的衰退并不断加深，他在 2008 年出版的《宏观经济学的圣杯》一书中详细描述了这一过程：他在 2008 年出版的《宏观经济学的圣杯：日本大衰退的教训》一书中详细描述了这一过程。他的结论是一切都与债务有关。



Fed’s tapering process began in earnest. It’s only when the tide goes out, as Warren Buffett famously said, that you learn who’s been swimming naked. Well, 2013 was a banner year for skinny-dipping among Asian leaders, central banks, and businesspeople. If Fed tapering gains momentum, Asian debt markets As 2014 began, Koo’s conclusion took on even greater resonance as they could be in for a brutal reality check. It’s not just Chinese companies overleveraging balance sheets in recent years. According to Standard Chartered, the average corporate debt-to-gross-domestic-product ratio in Asia, excluding Japan, jumped from 76 percent in 2007 to 97 percent in the first quarter of 2013, never mind all the borrowing since then. That’s 20 percentage points higher than the United States and markedly above Latin America and Eastern Europe. And what about Japan, home to the world’s largest debt burden? If quantitative-easing efforts drive inflation toward 2 percent by late 2014, as the Bank of Japan hopes, look out. At some point, markets will realize that 10-year government bonds yielding well below 1 percent do not compute given Japan’s shrinking population. The years ahead could see the laws of finance reassert themselves.

美联储缩表进程正式开始。正如沃伦-巴菲特（Warren Buffett）的名言所说，只有当潮水退去时，你才会知道谁在裸泳。2013年是亚洲领导人、央行和商界人士裸泳的一年。如果美联储缩表势头强劲，亚洲债市将面临严峻考验 2014 年伊始，辜胜阻的结论引起了更大反响。近年来，不仅仅是中国企业的资产负债表过度杠杆化。根据渣打银行的数据，除日本外，亚洲企业债务与国内生产总值的平均比率从2007年的76%跃升至2013年第一季度的97%，更不用说此后的借贷。这比美国高出20个百分点，明显高于拉丁美洲和东欧。那么拥有世界上最大债务负担的日本又如何呢？如果量化宽松政策能如日本央行所愿，在 2014 年末将通胀率推向 2%，那就要小心了。到那时，市场就会意识到，鉴于日本人口的萎缩，收益率远低于 1% 的 10 年期政府债券是不合算的。未来几年，金融法则可能会重新发挥作用。



The entire world has a vested interest in Kuroda keeping the magic alive. In July 2013, Deputy Economy Minister Yasutoshi Nishimura admitted something quite profound: “This is the last chance for Japan’s economy.” Many worry Kuroda is hastening what they see as Tokyo’s demise. Hedge-fund manager Bass of Hayman Capital is now surer than ever in his bet on a Japanese crash. So far Wizard Kuroda has bamboozled and crushed skeptics with overwhelming monetary force. It’s an entirely open question how long he can pull off this feat should the bond vigilantes James Carville feared 20 years ago rise up. Then, Japan’s monster of a bond market may scare us all.

黑田能否保持魔力，关系到整个世界的切身利益。2013 年 7 月，经济副大臣西村康稔承认了一件非常深刻的事情："这是日本经济最后的机会"许多人担心黑田东彦正在加速他们眼中东京的灭亡。海曼资本的对冲基金经理巴斯 现在比以往任何时候都更加确信 他对日本经济崩溃的赌注。到目前为止，黑田东彦已经用压倒性的货币力量迷惑并击溃了怀疑论者。如果 20 年前詹姆斯-卡维尔（James Carville）担心的债券守夜人出现，黑田还能坚持多久，这完全是个未知数。到那时，日本债券市场的怪物可能会吓到我们所有人。





Chapter 4

The Fukushima Effect

How Rampant Cronyism Holds Japan Back

第 4 章福岛效应猖獗的裙带关系如何阻碍日本发展





The coastal city of Natori is typical for northeastern Japan. Located along the fertile plains of the Masuda River, Natori is part of Miyagi Prefecture, one of six that make up the Tohoku region, a remote area known as much for breathtaking scenery and severe weather patterns as for its thriving fishing and agriculture trades. For Natori’s 72,000 people, the morning of March 11, 2011, was one like any other. The forecast was for rain that Friday, the fish market was abuzz with activity, school buses shuttled children to class, and office workers were toiling away with thoughts of the weekend. No one could have known Natori was hours away from global infamy.

名取是典型的日本东北部沿海城市。名取位于肥沃的增田川平原沿岸，隶属于宫城县，是东北地区的六个县之一，这个偏远地区以壮丽的景色和恶劣的天气模式以及繁荣的渔业和农业而闻名。对于名取的 7.2 万居民来说，2011 年 3 月 11 日的早晨和往常一样。天气预报说周五有雨，鱼市上热闹非凡，校车接送孩子们去上课，上班族们正在辛勤工作，想着周末的事情。没有人会知道，几个小时后，名取就会在全球声名狼藉。



At 2:46 p.m. that day, a magnitude 9 earthquake, the biggest known to have ever hit modern Japan, struck roughly 43 miles east of Tohoku’s Oshika Peninsula. The ground under Natori rumbled violently for an estimated six minutes. But that was just the beginning of the day’s deadly events. Thirty minutes later, the first signs of water appeared in the city center. What started as a slow trickle morphed into giant waves as high as 133 feet. Within two hours, a city with known roots back to 1867 virtually disappeared.

当天下午 2 时 46 分，东北大鹿半岛以东约 43 英里处发生了 9 级地震，这是日本现代史上已知的最大地震。名取地下的地面剧烈地震动了大约六分钟。但这只是当天致命事件的开始。30 分钟后，市中心出现了第一批积水迹象。从开始的缓慢涓流演变成高达 133 英尺的巨浪。在两个小时内，这座可追溯到 1867 年的城市几乎消失殆尽。



Natori became ground zero for the world’s first images of what Japanese call “3/11.” It was featured in the first news footage that blanketed a world that had come to think of tsunamis as a concern for developing nations, not a first-world power like Japan. Petrifying images of cars, trucks, and even entire buildings being washed away had locals wondering if they’d been cast in some splashy end-of-the world Hollywood action flick. There was indeed an almost biblical quality to the way the nation shook on March 11 and the waters rose with supernatural speed to swallow entire cities, towns, and villages. Trains were thrown into the air like something out of a Godzilla film, roads turned to jelly, and nuclear power plants coughed out radiation. At times, many felt like producer Jerry Bruckheimer might suddenly yell “Cut!” as he finished up his latest apocalyptic box-office smash starring Nicolas Cage or Bruce Willis. Maybe John Cusack is in town filming 2012, the Sequel.

名取成为世界上第一批日本人称之为 "3-11 "的影像的拍摄地。海啸是发展中国家的问题，而不是像日本这样的第一世界强国的问题。汽车、卡车甚至整栋建筑被冲走的恐怖画面，让当地人怀疑自己是否被卷入了好莱坞动作片中的世界末日。3 月 11 日，全国震动，海水以超自然的速度上涨，吞没了整个城市、城镇和村庄，这确实有一种近乎圣经的感觉。火车被抛向空中，就像哥斯拉电影中的场景一样，道路变成了果冻，核电站发出辐射。有时，许多人觉得制片人杰瑞-布鲁克海默（Jerry Bruckheimer）在完成由尼古拉斯-凯奇（Nicolas Cage）或布鲁斯-威利斯（Bruce Willis）主演的最新末日票房大片时，可能会突然大喊一声 "停！"。也许约翰-库萨克正在城里拍摄《2012》续集。



All this was making for unprecedented theater down in Tokyo, where then–Prime Minister Naoto Kan was watching images on NHK, Japan’s national broadcaster. The true magnitude of the devastation took time to set in. At his initial post-quake press briefing, Kan called it a “crisis,” and for an hour or so, that felt right. That was, until more images poured in: waters were rising with horrible speed to swallow entire towns; shipping containers rolled like toys; bridges turned to tofu; schools brimming with children just up and disappeared; smoke was billowing out of nuclear reactors. As a sense of proportion settled in, “crisis” rapidly proved inadequate as the quake and tsunami precipitated the worst nuclear disaster since Chernobyl. What Japan had suffered was nothing short of a cataclysm.

在东京，时任首相菅直人正在观看日本国家广播公司 NHK 播放的画面。震灾的真正严重性需要时间才能显现。在震后的首次新闻发布会上，菅直人将其称为 "危机"，在一个小时左右的时间里，这种说法感觉是正确的。直到更多的画面涌入：海水以可怕的速度上涨，吞没了整个城镇；海运集装箱像玩具一样滚动；桥梁变成了豆腐；满是孩子的学校拔地而起，消失不见；核反应堆冒出滚滚浓烟。由于地震和海啸引发了切尔诺贝利事故以来最严重的核灾难，"危机 "一词很快被证明是不够的。日本所遭受的简直就是一场大灾难。



It couldn’t have come at a worse time for Japan, which had been gasping for economic life for two decades. The very next day, household-name economists like Nouriel Roubini, known as “Dr. Doom,” said a “shock like this” would accelerate Japan’s descent into a full-blown debt crisis. Others, however, had a different take on the same shock; they wondered about the cathartic potential of a natural disaster of this scale. Included in this camp was Malcolm Gladwell. “The only time you can get things done is in moments of genuine crisis and catastrophes—there’s a small opportunity to do an extraordinary amount,” the author of The Tipping Point and Outliers told Bloomberg Television on March 29, 2011. “Japan, a country whose politics were in deadlock and sluggish for many, many years, I hope they can seize this moment and accomplish a lot.”

对于二十年来一直在为经济命脉喘息的日本来说，这是一个再糟糕不过的时刻了。第二天，家喻户晓的经济学家，如被称为 "末日博士 "的努里埃尔-鲁比尼（Nouriel Roubini）说，"这样的冲击 "将加速日本陷入全面的债务危机。然而，其他人对同样的冲击有不同的看法；他们对如此大规模的自然灾害的宣泄潜力表示怀疑。马尔科姆-格拉德威尔（Malcolm Gladwell）就是其中之一。"2011年3月29日，《引爆点》（The Tipping Point）和《离群者》（Outliers）的作者马尔科姆-格拉德威尔（Malcolm Gladwell）对彭博社电视台说："只有在真正的危机和灾难时刻，你才能把事情做好--这是个做非凡事情的小机会。"日本这个国家的政治陷入僵局和低迷已经很多很多年了，我希望他们能够抓住这个时机，取得巨大成就。



Pundits had been saying for years, after all, that it would require a huge crisis to end Japan’s political paralysis. Temblors also had a complicated place in the Japanese psyche as change agents.

毕竟，学者们多年来一直在说，需要一场巨大的危机才能结束日本的政治瘫痪。作为变革的推动者，暴风雨在日本人的心理中也有着复杂的地位。



There’s a widely held belief, a local mythology, that tectonic-plate shifts can coincide with big ones above the ground—in good ways and bad. An 1855 earthquake that destroyed much of modern-day Tokyo bookmarked the twilight of the Tokugawa period, during which Japan was isolated for two centuries. Rebuilding efforts after the devastation of 1923 coincided with the rise of Japanese militarism. Kobe’s 1995 tragedy dovetailed with the end of Japan’s postwar industrial boom and deflation. Might 3/11 also signal historic change?

人们普遍认为，构造板块的移动可能与地面上的大地震同时发生，这在当地是一个神话，有好的一面，也有坏的一面。1855 年的一场地震摧毁了现代东京的大部分地区，为德川时代的末期划上了句号，在此期间，日本与世隔绝了两个世纪。1923 年大地震后的重建工作恰逢日本军国主义的兴起。1995 年的神户悲剧与日本战后工业繁荣和通货紧缩的结束相吻合。3/11 是否也预示着历史性的变革？



The idea was that the complacency and distraction that had pervaded Nagatacho, Tokyo’s Capitol Hill, for many a year was no longer an option. Politicians who spent the last two-plus decades doubling down massive borrowing to finance public works, with ultralow interest rates and lifetime employment, eschewing immigration, and with a rigid industrial structure favoring exports from a handful of behemoths, compliant banks, and clubby ties between the political and business worlds would have to roll up their sleeves to rebuild after the strongest earthquake on record. They would need to do so with fresh thinking and creativity and without the luxury of the massive borrowing that has been propping up the nation since 1990.

当时的想法是，东京国会山长田町多年来弥漫的自满情绪和分心状态已不复存在。过去二十多年来，政客们一直在加倍大规模举债，为公共工程提供资金，同时实行超低利率和终身雇佣制，避免移民，僵化的产业结构偏向于少数巨头的出口，银行唯命是从，政界和商界之间存在着俱乐部式的联系，他们必须卷起袖子，在有记录以来最强烈的地震之后进行重建。他们需要以全新的思维和创造力来完成重建工作，而不能奢望自 1990 年以来一直支撑着国家的巨额借贷。



Economists have long argued that a crisis is a terrible thing to waste. That’s particularly true of Nobel laureate Milton Friedman and his ilk. “Only a crisis, actual or perceived, produces real change,” Friedman wrote in his 1962 book, Capitalism and Freedom.

长期以来，经济学家们一直认为，危机是一种可怕的浪费。诺贝尔经济学奖得主米尔顿-弗里德曼和他的同僚们更是如此。"弗里德曼在 1962 年出版的《资本主义与自由》一书中写道："只有危机，无论是实际发生的还是感知到的，才能产生真正的变革。



When that crisis occurs, the actions that are taken depend on the ideas that are lying around. That, I believe, is our basic function: to develop alternatives to existing policies, to keep them alive and available until the politically impossible becomes politically inevitable.

当危机发生时，所采取的行动取决于周围的想法。我认为，这就是我们的基本职能：为现有政策制定替代方案，使其保持活力，直至政治上不可能的事情在政治上变得不可避免。





Naomi Klein explored the pros and cons of the strategy in 2007’s The Shock Doctrine. While her emphasis was largely on how free-market ideologues exploit crises to impose rapid and irreversible change in nations around the world—like the Bush administration’s misguided Iraq invasion—there are times when a major shock hands a people a chance to unleash the doctrine on themselves. The last few years have seen no better example of that potential than Japan. Clearly, 3/11 would catalyze the government to articulate a new and grand vision for the nation, overcoming bureaucrats’ reluctance to make vital decisions and the realities of the deflationary forces that depressed both companies and consumers.

纳奥米-克莱因（Naomi Klein）在2007年出版的《休克理论》（The Shock Doctrine）一书中探讨了这一策略的利弊。虽然她主要强调的是自由市场的意识形态主义者如何利用危机在世界各国强加快速且不可逆转的变革，比如布什政府错误地入侵伊拉克--但有时，重大的冲击会给一个民族一个机会，让他们对自己释放这一理论。在过去几年中，日本就是这种潜力的最好例证。显然，"3-11 "事件将促使政府为国家提出新的宏伟愿景，克服官僚们不愿意做出重要决定的心理，以及压抑企业和消费者的通货紧缩现实。



Instead of catalyzing change, the events of 3/11 demonstrated the stubborn resilience of Japan Inc. The best explanation for this may come from Elisabeth Kuebler-Ross and the five stages of grief outlined in her 1969 book, On Death and Dying. They aptly capture where the collective Japanese psyche has journeyed, and where it hasn’t, since 3/11. Just as the terminally ill experience denial, anger, bargaining, despair, and ultimate acceptance, so have the Japanese people.

3/11 事件非但没有催生变革，反而展示了日本公司顽强的韧性。对此最好的解释可能来自伊丽莎白-库伯勒-罗斯（Elisabeth Kuebler-Ross）和她在 1969 年出版的《论死亡与濒死》（On Death and Dying）一书中概述的悲伤五阶段。它们恰如其分地捕捉到了日本人的集体心理自 3/11 事件以来所经历和未经历的阶段。正如临终病人经历否认、愤怒、讨价还价、绝望和最终接受一样，日本人也是如此。



The first hints of denial came days after the tsunami erased entire communities and overwhelmed a nuclear facility 135 miles from Tokyo. As radiation leaked at the Fukushima power plants, authorities assured the nation, and indeed the world, that all was well. Tokyo Electric Power Co., whose negligence led to the worst nuclear mess since the Chernobyl meltdown in Ukraine in 1986, hid the severity of the crisis—and is still obfuscating today.

在海啸吞噬了整个社区并淹没了距东京 135 英里的核设施几天后，首次出现了否认的迹象。随着福岛核电站的辐射泄漏，当局向全国乃至全世界保证一切正常。东京电力公司的疏忽导致了自 1986 年乌克兰切尔诺贝利核泄漏事故以来最严重的核灾难，该公司隐瞒了危机的严重性，至今仍在混淆视听。



Anger arrived with the first press reports about how close the world came to losing Tokyo, home to some 13 million people and some of the biggest equity markets on the globe. Blood pressures rose with more details about how Kan stormed into Tepco headquarters and demanded that management abandon its plan to evacuate all staff from Fukushima. Kan commanded Tepco to gain control over the meltdown and, in the process, literally saved the city from extinction. The plight of hundreds of thousands in Tohoku also enraged the nation as reconstruction plans unfolded at a glacial pace. What the government missed was that the Japanese wanted change. They longed for greater transparency among leaders reluctant to disengage the autopilot that had been guiding the country for 20 years. They wanted someone at Tepco to go to jail and for the bureaucrats who enabled their incompetence to be fired. Public fury fueled the biggest street protests since the 1960s.

第一份新闻报道称，世界距离失去东京如此之近，而东京拥有约 1300 万人口和全球最大的股票市场。关于菅直人如何冲进日本电力公司总部，要求管理层放弃从福岛疏散所有员工的计划的更多细节使人们的血压升高。菅直人命令日本电力公司控制核泄漏，并在此过程中拯救了这座濒临灭绝的城市。由于重建计划进展缓慢，东北数十万人的困境也激怒了全国人民。政府忽略的是，日本人希望改变。他们渴望提高领导人的透明度，但他们又不愿意脱离 20 年来指导国家发展的 "自动驾驶仪"。他们希望东京电力公司的某个人被关进监狱，也希望那些助长其无能的官僚们被解雇。公众的愤怒引发了自 20 世纪 60 年代以来最大规模的街头抗议活动。



Increasingly, it dawned on the masses that engineering the kind of epochal change they crave was more than they had bargained for. News reports of shantytowns, radioactive schools, and squandered rebuilding funds became less frequent. Interest from abroad, which was once so intense, waned. Donations and public-service announcements poured in from the likes of Rihanna, U2, Cyndi Lauper, Sonic Youth, Norah Jones, and Lou Reed. Lady Gaga sold special bracelets on her website to fund relief efforts. Stories about the resilience of the Japanese people were eclipsed by curiosity about the role that ingrained conventions of culture and reflexive obedience played in the crisis.

越来越多的群众意识到，他们所渴望的那种划时代的变革远远超出了他们的预期。关于棚户区、放射性学校和浪费的重建资金的新闻报道越来越少。来自国外的关注也一度减弱。蕾哈娜（Rihanna）、U2、辛迪-劳伯（Cyndi Lauper）、音速青年（Sonic Youth）、诺拉-琼斯（Norah Jones）和卢-里德（Lou Reed）等人的捐款和公益广告纷至沓来。Lady Gaga 在自己的网站上出售特制手镯，为救灾工作提供资金。人们对根深蒂固的文化传统和条件反射式的顺从在这场危机中扮演的角色充满好奇，而关于日本人民坚韧不拔的故事则黯然失色。



Realization of how little would change led to the despair phase. Anguished pundits explored the depths and indeed the surreal resilience of the nation’s political and social inertia and how many of the biggest risks Japanese face—earthquakes, Chinese pollution, North Korea’s threats—seemed beyond the government’s control. Disillusioned voters even moved to reelect the Liberal Democratic Party, which they had tossed out in disgust in 2009.

意识到变化微乎其微后，人们进入了绝望阶段。悲愤的学者们探讨了日本政治和社会惰性的深度和超现实的韧性，以及日本面临的许多最大风险--地震、中国污染、朝鲜威胁--似乎都超出了政府的控制范围。心灰意冷的选民甚至开始重新选举自民党，他们曾在 2009 年厌恶地抛弃了该党。



By the second anniversary of 3/11, in March 2013, Japan had gone full circle to acceptance. The clearest indication of that was voters’ support for Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s return to the helm after a feeble 2006–2007 stint in the job. While Abe has had a good start this time around, only time will tell if his pledges of change, which are big on talk and small on bold action, will end in a new cycle of grief. For unless Abe deregulates the economy, improves a corporate-governance system that produced the fraud at Olympus, severs the incestuous ties between government and business that enabled Tepco’s incompetence, and finds safer energy sources before the next giant quake, he will just produce Japan’s next asset bubble. To understand how Japan got here, and what the rest of the world can learn from its experience, we must explore the “Fukushima Effect.”

到 2013 年 3 月 "3-11 "事件两周年时，日本已经完全接受了这一事实。最明显的迹象就是选民支持首相安倍晋三在2006-2007年碌碌无为之后重新掌权。虽然安倍晋三这次有了一个良好的开端，但只有时间才能证明，他那些光说不练的改革承诺是否会以新一轮的悲痛告终。因为除非安倍放松对经济的管制，改善导致奥林帕斯欺诈事件的公司治理体系，切断导致东京电力公司无能的官商乱伦关系，并在下一次大地震之前找到更安全的能源，否则他只会制造日本的下一个资产泡沫。要了解日本是如何走到这一步的，以及世界其他国家可以从日本的经验中学到什么，我们必须探究 "福岛效应"。





If ever there were a microcosm of what ails Japan, the omnipotent nuclear power industry with its legacy of fatal accidents, conflicts of interest, and failure to evolve is it. Too often, those writing nuclear-safety rules were also doing surveys and signing off on inspections. It would seem an issue well worth the attention of Julian Assange of WikiLeaks fame and his ilk. After all, since oceans don’t have boundaries, any nuclear crisis is an international incident. Were Japan’s nuclear sites better inspected and maintained, we’d all be better off. Flippant as it may seem, Japanese found themselves wondering who had put Homer Simpson in charge of the nation’s nuclear safety. Japan’s nuclear safety record these last 15 years seems no sounder than that of the fictional Springfield Nuclear Power Plant, where on The Simpsons, Homer is head of safety. Only this was no laughing matter.

如果说日本的问题是一个缩影的话，那么无所不能的核电行业及其遗留下来的致命事故、利益冲突和不思进取就是一个缩影。制定核安全规则的人往往同时也在进行调查和检查。这似乎是一个非常值得维基解密的朱利安-阿桑奇及其同类关注的问题。毕竟，海洋没有边界，任何核危机都是国际事件。如果日本的核设施能得到更好的检查和维护，我们大家都会过得更好。看似轻率，但日本人不禁要问，是谁让荷马-辛普森（Homer Simpson）负责国家的核安全？过去 15 年中，日本的核安全记录似乎并不比虚构的春田核电站好多少，在《辛普森一家》中，荷马是该核电站的安全主管。只是这并不是一件好笑的事情。



“There was certainly no shortage of critics,” Richard Samuels wrote in 3.11: Disaster and Change in Japan: “If Kan became the whipping boy in the discourse of leadership, Tepco became the consensus villain with regard to risk and vulnerability. It was an easy target.” The governor of Fukushima, Yuhei Sato, for example, wasted no time in lashing out at Tepco and refused to accept a personal apology from company president Masataka Shimizu.

"理查德-萨缪尔斯在《3.11：日本的灾难与变革》一书中写道："批评者当然不乏其人："如果说菅直人成了领导力讨论中的鞭挞对象，那么在风险和脆弱性方面，日本电力公司则成了众所周知的恶棍。它很容易成为众矢之的"。例如，福岛县知事佐藤雄平毫不留情地抨击了日本电力公司，并拒绝接受该公司总裁清水正孝的个人道歉。



Japan’s postmortem on the failures at Tepco and the regulators who oversee the company started out well enough. Rather than tap a physicist, engineer, or analyst to run an investigative panel, officialdom entrusted things to Tokyo University professor emeritus Kiyoshi Kurokawa, a medical doctor without significant ties to the energy industry. Kurokawa is a popular cultural figure, with a fluency in English, boisterous laugh, and bluntness that makes him a curious presence on TV talk shows. But if government officials were hoping for Fukushima whitewash, they didn’t get it.

日本对东京电力公司（Tepco）和负责监管该公司的监管机构的失误进行的尸检一开始就很顺利。官方没有启用物理学家、工程师或分析师来管理调查小组，而是委托给了东京大学名誉教授黑川清（Kiyoshi Kurokawa）。黑川是一位颇受欢迎的文化人物，流利的英语、爽朗的笑声和直率的性格使他在电视访谈节目中成为一个令人好奇的存在。但是，如果政府官员希望为福岛核事故洗白，他们并没有如愿。



Kurokawa’s 641-page report, released on July 5, 2012, had lots to say about Tokyo’s many shortcomings, and the good doctor pointed fingers in directions that surprised the political establishment. His conclusion: The Fukushima meltdown was a preventable, manmade disaster stemming from the worst conformist tendencies of Japanese culture. And it seemed like a badly needed sign that a break with the errant ways of the past was in order. The first step to fixing a problem—and coping with grief—is identifying what the problem is, something Japan’s government had stubbornly refused to do. Scant attention was paid, for example, to how government–industry collusion placed so much of Japan’s population in danger, as did a reluctance to question authority and a reflexive obedience to process.

2012 年 7 月 5 日，黑川发表了一份长达 641 页的报告，其中对东京的诸多不足之处进行了详尽的阐述。他的结论是福岛核泄漏是一场可预防的人为灾难，源于日本文化中最糟糕的墨守成规倾向。这似乎是一个急需的信号，表明必须与过去的错误做法决裂。解决问题和应对悲痛的第一步是找出问题所在，而日本政府却顽固地拒绝这样做。举例来说，政府与企业之间的勾结如何使日本如此多的人口处于危险之中，以及不愿质疑权威和对程序的条件反射式服从，这些问题都没有得到关注。



Much of the blame lies with the arrogance and incompetence of Tepco, which runs the Fukushima reactors now referenced in history books next to Chernobyl. But, as Kurokawa argued, it takes an insidious and toxic business and political culture to cultivate such a corrupt and dangerous system. Why, for example, is Tepco still in business? Why hasn’t it been nationalized? Because of Japan’s omnipotent “nuclear village,” the nexus of power companies and pro-nuclear regulators, bureaucrats, and researchers that champions the industry, which came in for particular, and well-deserved, scorn in the Kurokawa review.

这在很大程度上应归咎于日本电力公司的傲慢和无能，该公司运营的福岛核反应堆现在已成为与切尔诺贝利事故相提并论的历史事件。但是，正如黑川所言，需要一种阴险毒辣的商业和政治文化来培养这样一个腐败而危险的系统。例如，为什么日本电力公司仍在经营？为什么它没有被国有化？因为日本无所不能的 "核村"，即电力公司与支持核工业的监管机构、官僚和研究人员之间的联系。



A particularly explosive suggestion was that it wasn’t the tsunami that damaged the reactors and safety equipment, but the earthquake itself. It undermined Tepco’s claims that the disaster was some act of God that it couldn’t have foreseen or avoided. That storyline was meant to deflect attention from design flaws, shoddy construction materials, and insufficient training of reactor personnel—in other words, the human factor. At Fukushima, for instance, backup diesel generators that might have averted the disaster were located in a basement and swamped by waves. “This in the country that invented the word tsunami,” quipped Ken Brockman, a former director of nuclear installation safety at the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna, on March 18, 2011.

一个特别具有爆炸性的建议是，损坏反应堆和安全设备的不是海啸，而是地震本身。这削弱了日本电力公司的说法，即这场灾难是天灾，它无法预见或避免。这种说法旨在转移人们对设计缺陷、偷工减料和反应堆人员培训不足的关注，换句话说，就是对人为因素的关注。例如，在福岛，本可以避免灾难的备用柴油发电机位于地下室，被海浪淹没。"2011年3月18日，维也纳国际原子能机构（International Atomic Energy Agency）核设施安全部前主任肯-布罗克曼（Ken Brockman）打趣道："这是一个发明了海啸一词的国家。



Kurokawa’s six-month investigation was a Japanese first, with wide-ranging subpoena powers and public hearings at which Kan and then–Tepco President Shimizu gave vastly conflicting accounts of the disaster response. The three previous government-led inquiries went easy on the nuclear village. Kurokawa’s pulled no punches, warning against Japan’s tendency toward cosmetic solutions, including replacing senior officials at regulatory agencies and power companies or just changing their names. It highlighted the dangers of lobbying and shamed regulators with tales of the difficulty panel members had getting documents.

黑川的调查为期 6 个月，是日本的首次调查，他拥有广泛的传唤权和公开听证权，在听证会上，菅直人和时任日本电力公司总裁清水对灾难应对的说法大相径庭。此前三次由政府主导的调查都对核电站采取了宽容的态度。黑川的调查报告毫不留情，警告日本不要倾向于采取表面文章，包括更换监管机构和电力公司的高级官员或仅仅更改他们的名字。报告强调了游说的危险，并讲述了小组成员难以获得文件的故事，令监管机构蒙羞。



“What must be admitted, very painfully, is that this was a disaster ‘Made in Japan,’” Kurokawa wrote. “Its fundamental causes are to be found in the ingrained conventions of Japanese culture: our reflexive obedience; our reluctance to question authority; our devotion to sticking with the program; our groupism; and our insularity.”

"黑川写道："必须痛苦地承认，这是一场'日本制造'的灾难。"其根本原因在于日本文化中根深蒂固的传统：我们条件反射式的服从；我们不愿意质疑权威；我们执着于按部就班；我们的群体主义；以及我们的孤僻"。



Of course, Kurokawa could just as easily have been taking about Japan’s economy in the two decades after the asset bubble burst. But the real question was what the patient—Japan Inc.—would do with the doctor’s diagnosis. Sadly, it’s still stuck with the unhealthy ways that courted nuclear disaster. The prime minister who came after Kan, Yoshihiko Noda, largely shelved Kurokawa’s report. Now that Abe’s pro-nuclear LDP is back in power and enjoys majorities in both houses of parliament, the government’s complete focus is on restarting the nuclear power plants mothballed after 3/11 amid safely concerns. Even the Nuclear Regulation Authority, created in September 2012 ostensibly to tighten oversight, is devoting more time and limited resources to recertifying reactors for restarts than monitoring the Fukushima cleanup and keeping the public safe.

当然，黑川说的也可能是资产泡沫破灭后二十年的日本经济。但真正的问题是，病人--日本公司--会如何对待医生的诊断。可悲的是，日本仍停留在导致核灾难的不健康方式上。菅直人之后的首相野田佳彦在很大程度上搁置了黑川的报告。现在，安倍的亲核自民党重新执政，并在参众两院获得多数席位，政府的全部精力都集中在重启 3/11 后因安全问题而停运的核电站上。即使是 2012 年 9 月成立的表面上是为了加强监管的核监管局，也将更多的时间和有限的资源用于重新认证反应堆的重启，而不是监督福岛核电站的清理工作和确保公众安全。



Abe even helped Tokyo win the 2020 Summer Olympics by exaggerating the progress Japan has made in cleaning up Fukushima. The same week in September 2013 when Abe was in Buenos Aires addressing the International Olympic Committee, news was breaking back home about radioactive groundwater leaking into the Pacific Ocean. Another problem is over 1,000 spent fuel rods that are bleeding radiation into the atmosphere, and the threat of exposure is far greater than Japanese officials admit. Even so, Abe told the Olympic judges: “Let me assure you the situation is under control.”

安倍甚至通过夸大日本在清理福岛方面取得的进展，帮助东京赢得了 2020 年夏季奥运会。2013 年 9 月，安倍晋三在布宜诺斯艾利斯向国际奥林匹克委员会发表演讲的同一周，日本国内却传出放射性地下水泄漏到太平洋的消息。另一个问题是，1000 多根乏燃料棒正在向大气中排放辐射，辐射威胁远比日本官员承认的要大。即便如此，安倍晋三还是对奥运裁判说"让我向你们保证，情况已经得到控制"。



Japanese officialdom is being blinded not only by denial but also by dollar signs. In May, Abe jetted to Turkey to help close a $22 billion deal for Japan to build nuclear power plants in that seismically active nation. That kind of cash makes power companies virtually untouchable. And it raises doubts about Tepco’s admission that 300 tons of water laced with strontium and other particles is pouring into the Pacific on many days. One can’t help but wonder if the leaks are of much greater magnitude.

日本官方不仅被否认所蒙蔽，也被美元符号所蒙蔽。今年 5 月，安倍晋三乘飞机前往土耳其，帮助日本完成一项价值 220 亿美元的交易，在这个地震活跃的国家建造核电站。这笔资金让电力公司几乎无法动弹。这也让人对日本电力公司承认有 300 吨含有锶和其他微粒的水在很多天里流入太平洋产生怀疑。人们不禁要问，泄漏的规模是否更大。



Instead of acting to decommission Fukushima, invite independent auditors from overseas to assess the magnitude of the damage, decide if the surrounding area is really safe for inhabitants, fishing, or farming, scour the world for innovative solutions, break up the nuclear village, and level with the Japanese about cleanup costs that will be in the hundreds of billions of dollars, Abe is focused on sales.

安倍晋三没有采取行动让福岛退役，没有邀请海外独立审计机构评估损害程度，没有决定周边地区对居民、渔业或农业是否真正安全，没有在全球范围内寻找创新解决方案，没有拆散核村，也没有与日本人就数千亿美元的清理费用达成一致，而是专注于销售。



Three months later, reality intervened thanks partly to international pressure. Media reports from New York to London to Seoul pressured the Japanese press to return to a story that editors had been burying for many months. No longer able to downplay and refute environmental warnings from Greenpeace International, reports from the World Health Organization, and mounting evidence of radioactive groundwater gushing into the Pacific Ocean, Abe had no choice but to step up. In August, he admitted what much of the world already knew: Tepco isn’t up to the task of containing the disaster. Abe pledged his government would “make sure there is a swift and multifaceted approach in place” to stop the leak.

三个月后，部分由于国际压力，现实介入了。从纽约到伦敦再到首尔的媒体报道向日本媒体施压，要求他们重新报道编辑们掩盖多月的新闻。安倍再也无法淡化和反驳国际绿色和平组织的环境警告、世界卫生组织的报告以及放射性地下水涌入太平洋的越来越多的证据，他别无选择，只能挺身而出。8 月，他承认了世界上许多人已经知道的事实：日本电力公司没有能力控制这场灾难。安倍承诺，他的政府将 "确保迅速采取多方面的措施 "来阻止泄漏。



Until that moment, Japan’s leaders had been bewilderingly disengaged from their “BP moment.” Abe’s predecessors, Kan and Noda, virtually ignored the radiation leaks and spent fuel rods sitting out in the open air a short bullet-train ride from Tokyo. They entrusted the cleanup process to Tepco and felt little inclination to see to it that some of the company’s executives go to jail for negligence or are at least shamed. BP’s former chief executive officer, Tony Hayward, was at least fired and sued over the 2010 oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico. Tepco was leaking something far worse and lying through its teeth.

在此之前，日本领导人对他们的 "BP时刻 "置若罔闻，令人费解。安倍的前任菅直人和野田几乎对辐射泄漏和乏燃料棒的露天放置视而不见，而这些地方离东京只有很短的子弹列车车程。他们将清理工作委托给了东京电力公司，并没有打算让该公司的一些高管因玩忽职守而锒铛入狱或至少蒙羞。英国石油公司（BP）前首席执行官托尼-海沃德（Tony Hayward）至少因 2010 年墨西哥湾漏油事件被解雇和起诉。而日本东京电力公司却泄漏了更严重的泄漏物，而且还在撒谎。



Yet Abe’s Fukushima pledge hasn’t been matched by action. Once he secured the 2020 Olympics for Tokyo, it was back to business as usual. That means official Japan is still stuck on how Fukushima became synonymous with Chernobyl, not why it happened or what it means for the world. The how is the stuff of the gods, according to conventional wisdom. The event Japanese call 3/11 was an act of the heavens that no one could have possibly foreseen. There was no way to plan for it, no way Tepco could have known not to place all of its backup generators in the same place underground, just steps away from the sea in a tsunami-prone nation.

然而，安倍晋三的福岛承诺并没有得到相应的行动。一旦他为东京争取到了 2020 年奥运会的举办权，一切又恢复了往常。这意味着日本官方仍停留在福岛如何成为切尔诺贝利的代名词，而不是福岛事故发生的原因或对世界的意义。根据传统智慧，"如何发生 "是神的事情。日本人称之为 "3-11 "的事件是上天的杰作，没有人能够预见。我们根本无法对其进行规划，日本电力公司也不可能知道不应该把所有的备用发电机都放在地下的同一个地方，而这个地方离海啸多发国家的海边只有几步之遥。



This storyline ignores the why. Fukushima was a preventable, manmade disaster stemming from the worst conformist tendencies of Japan Inc. If executives got together globally and created a Hall of Shame for the greedy, corrupt, and clueless along them, Tepco would deserve its own wing. All Enron and Bernie Madoff did was manufacture fake profits. Tepco fudged its safety record and put the lives of tens of millions of people at risk, perhaps far more if its radiation continues imperiling the Pacific. In September, for example, Korea banned imports of fish caught near the site of the Fukushima nuclear accident. Radioactive traces have been found in bluefin tuna, not to mention on secondhand cars and auto parts imported by Russia from Japan.

这个故事情节忽略了原因。福岛事故是一场可预防的人为灾难，源于日本公司最恶劣的顺从主义倾向。如果全球的高管们聚集在一起，为贪婪、腐败和愚蠢的高管们建立一个耻辱堂，那么日本电力公司就应该有自己的一翼。安然和麦道夫所做的一切都是在制造虚假利润。日本电力公司伪造安全记录，危及数千万人的生命，如果其辐射继续危及太平洋地区，可能会危及更多的人。例如，9 月，韩国禁止进口在福岛核事故现场附近捕获的鱼类。在蓝鳍金枪鱼中发现了放射性痕迹，更不用说俄罗斯从日本进口的二手车和汽车零部件了。



Nuclear power enthusiasts argue that the science behind the reactors that prior to 3/11 provided 30 percent of Japan’s electricity is sound. Where the trouble starts, though, is when we fallible humans get our hands on the most potent power source history has ever known in a system without inadequate checks and balances. Rigorous as it may be, nuclear science didn’t stop the geniuses at Tepco from clustering all of Fukushima’s backup generators in the worst possible place. Human error also came into play with the 1999 Tokaimura nuclear accident, caused by workers literally mixing radioactive materials in buckets.

核电爱好者认为，核反应堆背后的科学是正确的，在 3/11 事件之前，这些反应堆提供了日本 30% 的电力。然而，当我们这些容易犯错的人类在一个缺乏充分制衡的系统中掌握了历史上最强大的电力来源时，问题就开始了。核科学虽然严谨，但并不能阻止日本电力公司的天才们将福岛的所有备用发电机集中在最糟糕的地方。1999 年发生的东海村核事故也存在人为错误，事故原因是工人将放射性物质混入桶中。



Tell that to the devastated towns within a 100-mile radius of Fukushima facing extinction—or the nearly 100,000 people still living in temporary shelters for nearly three years now—that atomic power is safe, clean, and cheap. Until utility operators can elevate reactors on huge shock absorbers or construct them from rubber, Japan’s people will fear them.

对福岛方圆 100 英里内面临灭顶之灾的受灾城镇，或者对近三年来仍生活在临时避难所的近 10 万人来说，原子能是安全、清洁和廉价的。在公用事业运营商能够用巨大的减震器升高反应堆或用橡胶建造反应堆之前，日本人民将对它们心存恐惧。





What can the world learn from the Fukushima Effect? Let’s start with Indonesia, by far Southeast Asia’s biggest economy, which is almost universally seen as a major economic power of the future. On any list of nations that might soon be invited to join the BRICS economies—Brazil, Russia, Indonesia, China, and South Africa—Indonesia warrants a place way up top. The fourth most populous nation in the world boasts an enviably young population, more than 26 percent of which is below 15. Not surprisingly, Indonesia is mulling a nuclear future. To keep growing in the 6 percent to 7 percent range, Indonesia needs energy, and lots of it. Hence the plan to build nuclear power plants.

世界能从福岛效应中学到什么？让我们从印尼说起，印尼是东南亚迄今为止最大的经济体，几乎被普遍视为未来的经济大国。在可能很快被邀请加入金砖五国（巴西、俄罗斯、印尼、中国和南非）的国家名单中，印尼理应名列前茅。这个世界第四人口大国拥有令人羡慕的年轻人口，其中超过 26% 的人口年龄在 15 岁以下。毫不奇怪，印尼正在酝酿核未来。为了保持 6% 到 7% 的增长率，印尼需要能源，而且是大量的能源。因此，印尼计划建造核电站。



Yet if a country as developed, technologically advanced, rules-obsessed, and earthquake-ready as Japan can’t avert a nuclear catastrophe, what hope do developing nations have? Indonesia’s regulatory environment is poor and its public sector far less tech-savvy than Japan’s. Its disaster-response record needs work and it’s a very seismically active place. Remember that Indonesia suffered by far the most casualties in December 2004, when a giant tsunami killed nearly 230,000 people.

然而，如果一个像日本这样发达、技术先进、恪守规则、随时准备应对地震的国家都无法避免核灾难，那么发展中国家还有什么希望呢？印尼的监管环境很差，公共部门的技术水平也远不及日本。印尼的灾难应对记录需要改进，而且印尼是一个地震活动频繁的地方。请记住，2004 年 12 月，印尼是迄今为止伤亡人数最多的国家，一场巨大的海啸造成近 23 万人死亡。



Indonesia’s nuclear-reactor plans might have raised few eyebrows on March 10, 2011, but in the post-Fukushima world, they need very careful consideration. If the ongoing drama in Japan tells the world anything, it’s that earthquake-prone nations should be aggressively pursuing nonnuclear options to fuel growth. Granted, Japan’s realities are a bit different. The Fukushima Daiichi power plant was 40 years old, almost as old as the median age of Japan’s people. The technology going into today’s reactors makes them far safer. The age of Japan’s plants prompted some world leaders, like Germany’s Chancellor Angela Merkel, to shut their oldest reactors.

2011 年 3 月 10 日，印尼的核反应堆计划可能还没有引起人们的注意，但在福岛事故后的世界里，这些计划需要慎重考虑。如果日本正在发生的事件能告诉世界什么，那就是地震多发国家应该积极寻求非核方案来推动经济增长。当然，日本的现实情况有些不同。福岛第一核电站已有 40 年历史，几乎与日本人口年龄中位数相当。当今反应堆所采用的技术使其安全性大大提高。日本电厂的老化促使一些世界领导人，如德国总理安格拉-默克尔，关闭了本国最老的反应堆。



Still, Japan’s disaster was decades in the making thanks to falsified safety reports, underestimated risks, and plain old corruption. Incestuous ties between government and industry helped fuel the excesses behind the 1980s bubble economy. That same public–private collusion also plagued responses to the economic downturn that followed. A bad-loan crisis festered, deflation took root, and competition from China exploded. All the while, Japan Inc. circled the wagons and tried to stave off both change and tough decisions. Likewise, those writing nuclear-safety rules were also doing surveys and signing off on inspections.

尽管如此，由于伪造安全报告、低估风险和普通的腐败，日本的灾难还是发生了几十年。政府与企业之间的不正当关系助长了 20 世纪 80 年代泡沫经济的过度发展。同样的公私勾结也困扰着应对随后出现的经济衰退的对策。不良贷款危机发酵，通货紧缩扎根，来自中国的竞争爆发。与此同时，日本公司却在原地打转，试图阻止变革和艰难的决策。同样，制定核安全规则的人也在进行调查和签署检查报告。



Also to be avoided is the offensive practice of public servants getting cushy gigs in industries they once oversaw. You might expect there to be strict rules about former government officials gaining lucrative employment at Tepco after retirement—you know, just to ensure that nuclear plants are actually being watched with some semblance of objectivity. Nope; the practice that encourages bureaucrats to look out for their future employers and not the average Japanese household is alive and well. It’s called amakudari, which means “descent from heaven.” Decades of doctored safety reports and underestimated risks at Tepco were made possible by bureaucrats looking the other way. Far from heaven, it’s made life a nightmare for farmers, fishermen, and millions living around Fukushima.

同样需要避免的是，公务员在他们曾经监管过的行业获得优厚待遇这种令人反感的做法。你可能会认为，对于前政府官员退休后在东京电力公司获得高薪工作会有严格的规定--要知道，这样做只是为了确保核电厂能得到某种程度的客观监督。不，鼓励官僚们为自己未来的雇主而不是普通日本家庭着想的做法依然存在。这就是所谓的 "amakudari"，意思是 "从天而降"。几十年来，由于官僚们的睁一只眼闭一只眼，日本电力公司的安全报告被篡改，风险被低估。对农民、渔民和生活在福岛周围的数百万人来说，这远不是天堂，而是噩梦。



Wall Street should learn from this corrupt phenomenon, too. The revolving door from government to Wall Street is rife with potential conflict. Here, think Robert Rubin leaving Goldman Sachs to join the Clinton administration, where he helped repeal the Depression-era firewalls between investment and commercial banking and precipitate the 2008 global crisis. After leaving the White House, Rubin rotated to Citicorp Inc. Or take Alan Greenspan and former U.S. Senator Phil Gramm, who worked with Rubin on that endeavor and then got plum jobs at Deutsche Bank AG and UBS AG, respectively. The list goes on.

华尔街也应该从这种腐败现象中吸取教训。从政府到华尔街的旋转门充斥着潜在的冲突。罗伯特-鲁宾（Robert Rubin）离开高盛加入克林顿政府后，帮助废除了大萧条时期投资银行和商业银行之间的防火墙，并引发了 2008 年的全球危机。离开白宫后，鲁宾又轮换到花旗银行。艾伦-格林斯潘和前美国参议员菲尔-格拉姆也曾与鲁宾共事，后来分别在德意志银行和瑞银集团谋得要职。这样的例子不胜枚举。



Were Japan’s nuclear sites better inspected and maintained and regulated with true independence and vigilance, we’d all be better off. Japan shows how difficult that balancing act can be. With scant energy deposits of its own, nuclear power became a national priority as Japan clawed out of the devastation of World War II, a conflict it fought partly to secure oil supplies. The irony, of course, is that the only nation ever attacked by nuclear weapons championed them to such an extent. It has 54 reactors, more than any country except the United States and France, to power its industries. This pits economic demands against safety concerns in one of the world’s most earthquake-prone places.

如果日本的核设施能够得到更好的检查、维护和监管，并保持真正的独立性和警惕性，那么我们所有人都会过得更好。日本的情况表明，这种平衡是多么困难。日本自身的能源储量匮乏，在二战的破坏中奋力挣扎时，核能成为了国家的首要任务。当然，具有讽刺意味的是，这个唯一遭受过核武器攻击的国家却如此支持核电。除美国和法国外，它拥有 54 座反应堆，比任何国家都多，为其工业提供动力。在这个世界上最容易发生地震的地方之一，经济需求与安全问题形成了对立。



The allure of nuclear power is obvious for developing nations from Indonesia to India to China. Yet, here’s a number that should worry humankind: 114. That’s Indonesia’s ranking in Transparency International’s latest corruption perception index, putting it behind Egypt, Tanzania, and Kosovo. Unless engineers can build remarkably shock-absorbent reactors, there’s a question about whether they should find wide use along the Ring of Fire, that arc of fault-lines and volcanoes encircling the Pacific Basin. And that’s before we consider the risks associated with corruption, shoddy regulation, and questionable safety standards.

从印度尼西亚、印度到中国，核能对发展中国家的诱惑是显而易见的。然而，有一个数字值得人类担忧：114。这是印尼在透明国际（Transparency International）最新公布的腐败感知指数中的排名，仅次于埃及、坦桑尼亚和科索沃。除非工程师们能建造出减震效果极佳的反应堆，否则人们不禁要问，这些反应堆是否应该在环太平洋盆地的 "火环"（断层线和火山环绕的弧形地带）上广泛使用。这还不算腐败、监管不力和安全标准有问题所带来的风险。



If these things can go this awry in Japan, as efficient, tech-savvy, and work-ethic-oriented a nation as there is, where won’t they? It’s a question Indonesia and other economic upstarts should consider long and hard.

日本是一个高效、精通技术、注重职业道德的国家，如果在日本都能出现这样的问题，那么在哪里不会呢？这是印尼和其他经济后起之秀应该深思熟虑的问题。



Did the Fukushima disaster turn Asia’s economic upstarts against nuclear? Not as much as one might think, according to Vlado Vivoda, a research fellow at the Griffith Asia Institute. Before 3/11, Asia was widely viewed as the future of nuclear power as China, India, and the rest of this power-hungry region raced to build reactors. After Japan’s crisis, that future seems very much in question.

福岛核灾难是否让亚洲的经济新贵们开始反对核电？格里菲斯亚洲研究所（Griffith Asia Institute）研究员弗拉多-维沃达（Vlado Vivoda）认为，并不像人们想象的那样。在 "3-11 "事件之前，亚洲被普遍认为是核电的未来，因为中国、印度和这个电力需求旺盛的地区的其他国家都在竞相建造核反应堆。日本危机发生后，这一未来似乎受到了极大的质疑。



“Some analysts suggested that Asia’s nuclear renaissance was over while others remained cautiously optimistic about the region’s nuclear power future,” Vivoda wrote in a March 2013 report published by the East Asia Forum. “With increasing competition for oil and gas among Asian nations and the negative impact of carbon pollution, nuclear power is still considered by many regional states as a matter of survival, both in terms of growing energy demands and environmental security.”

"一些分析家认为，亚洲的核复兴已经结束，而另一些分析家则对该地区的核电前景保持谨慎乐观，"维沃达在东亚论坛2013年3月发布的一份报告中写道。"随着亚洲各国对石油和天然气的竞争日益激烈，以及碳污染的负面影响，无论是从日益增长的能源需求还是从环境安全的角度来看，核电仍被许多地区国家视为生存问题"。



Fukushima turned a majority of Japanese against restarting the nation’s reactors. Yoshihiko Noda, Abe’s immediate predecessor, had pledged to phase out nuclear power by 2040. The moment he became prime minister in December 2012, Abe scrapped that plan. Yet, continued leaks and a series of accidents are pressuring Abe to return to Noda’s pledge. Even after disclosures last summer about contaminated groundwater polluting the Pacific, a series of troubling mishaps came to light.

福岛事故使大多数日本人反对重启国家反应堆。安倍晋三的前任野田佳彦曾承诺到 2040 年逐步淘汰核电。在 2012 年 12 月就任首相后，安倍晋三立即废除了这一计划。然而，持续不断的泄漏和一系列事故正迫使安倍重拾野田的承诺。即使在去年夏天披露了受污染的地下水污染太平洋的事件之后，一系列令人不安的事故仍被曝光。



On October 9, 2013, Fukushima workers mistakenly disconnected a pipe near a desalination device, dumping another 10 tons of contaminated water into the surrounding area and exposing workers to radiation. Days later, heavy rains were blamed for tainted water overflowing dikes. A series of investigative stories also emerged to enrage the Japanese masses anew. On October 25, 2013, a special report from Reuters alleged Tepco was exploiting workers by paying them less than promised and exposing them to more dangerous conditions than agreed upon. Ten days earlier, the Guardian detailed how workers on the frontlines were plagued by health problems and fearful about the future under the headline: “Plummeting Morale at Fukushima Daiichi as Nuclear Cleanup Takes Its Toll.”

2013 年 10 月 9 日，福岛核电站的工人误将海水淡化装置附近的一根管道拔掉，将另外 10 吨受污染的水倾倒到周围地区，使工人暴露在辐射之下。几天后，暴雨被归咎于受污染的水溢出堤坝。一系列调查报道的出现再次激怒了日本民众。2013 年 10 月 25 日，路透社的一篇特别报道称，日本电力公司剥削工人，付给他们的工资比承诺的少，并让他们暴露在比商定条件更危险的环境中。十天前，英国《卫报》以 "前线工人士气一落千丈 "为题，详细报道了前线工人的健康问题和对未来的担忧："福岛第一核电站的士气一落千丈 核清理工作带来了巨大损失"



Elsewhere in Asia, energy needs are trumping safety concerns. Take China, site of the world’s most ambitious nuclear development program. On top of 16 existing nuclear reactors, according to Vivoda, 26 are under construction and another 51 reactors are being planned. Initially, Japan’s 3/11 disaster prompted China’s State Council to suspend approval of nuclear-power projects until it implemented new safety procedures. Those standards are expected to be in place, clearing China’s path toward running history’s biggest nuclear industry.

在亚洲其他地方，能源需求压倒了安全问题。中国是世界上最雄心勃勃的核发展计划的实施地。据 Vivoda 报道，除现有的 16 座核反应堆外，中国还有 26 座核反应堆正在建设中，另有 51 座核反应堆正在规划中。最初，日本的 3/11 灾难促使中国国务院在实施新的安全程序之前暂停审批核电项目。这些标准有望出台，为中国运营历史上最大的核工业扫清道路。



India responded quite differently. Within a week of Japan’s meltdown, the government said its reactors—20 are in operation at six power plants—were safe and would continue running. “The government’s message is that it’s business as usual for nuclear power,” Vivoda said.

印度的反应却截然不同。日本核泄漏事故发生后不到一周，印度政府就表示，其六个核电站的 20 个反应堆是安全的，并将继续运行。"政府传达的信息是核电一切照旧，"维沃达说。



New Delhi’s stance is unsurprising in a country where power demand is surging and national electrification and grid integration programs are incomplete. Having passed the Indo–U.S. nuclear agreement in 2008, effectively ending a 34-year U.S. ban on supplying nuclear technology and fuel to India, and clearing the way for Australian uranium exports to India, New Delhi’s plans to increase its nuclear capacity are moving faster than ever.

在一个电力需求激增、国家电气化和电网一体化计划尚未完成的国家，新德里的立场不足为奇。2008 年，印美核协议获得通过，有效结束了美国长达 34 年禁止向印度供应核技术和核燃料的禁令，并为澳大利亚向印度出口铀扫清了障碍。





That isn’t sitting well with populations near the reactors. In West Bengal, for example, the government is refusing to green-light a proposed plant that would feature six Russian reactors. While some of the resistance reflects disputes involving local land, labor, and the logic of importing reactors critics say could be built domestically, a large swath of the Indian public is at odds with New Delhi.

反应堆附近的居民对此并不满意。例如，在西孟加拉邦，政府拒绝为一座拥有六座俄罗斯反应堆的拟议核电站开绿灯。虽然部分抵制反映了涉及当地土地、劳动力的争议，以及进口反应堆的逻辑问题，但批评者认为这些反应堆本可以在国内建造。



Korea, meanwhile, is a big user of nuclear power, with 20 operating reactors, or a potential exporter of it. But 2013 saw a sea change in the nation’s nuclear ambitions as growing public opposition to atomic power after the Fukushima disaster met a domestic scandal over faked safety documents. In July, President Park Geun-hye called for tighter government regulation and monitoring of the industry. Three months later, the findings of a report by a working group of academics and state officials prompted a significant shift away from a technology that’s been a mainstay of Korea’s energy mix since its first reactor opened in 1978. Thirty years later, in 2008, Seoul had decided nuclear energy would account for 41 percent of power generation capacity by 2035. In October, it lowered that goal to between 22 and 29 percent.

与此同时，韩国是核电的大用户，拥有 20 座运行中的反应堆，也是潜在的核电出口国。但在 2013 年，随着福岛核事故后公众对核电的反对声日益高涨，再加上伪造安全文件的国内丑闻，韩国的核电雄心发生了巨大变化。7 月，朴槿惠总统呼吁政府加强对该行业的监管和监督。三个月后，一个由学者和国家官员组成的工作小组的报告结果促使韩国开始大幅放弃这项自1978年第一座反应堆启用以来就一直是韩国能源组合支柱的技术。30 年后的 2008 年，首尔决定到 2035 年核能将占发电能力的 41%。今年10月，首尔将这一目标下调至22%至29%。



A scandal involving faked quality-control certificates for parts and the indictment of 100 officials on corruption and bribery charges helped inform the decision by Korea’s energy ministry. But so did the fallout from Tepco’s incompetence, which prompted a steady erosion in public support for nuclear power. In March 2013, on the second anniversary of Japan’s 3/11, 63 percent of Koreans said they consider domestic reactors unsafe in a survey by Hangil Research. A 2012 poll by the nonprofit Korean Federation for Environmental Movement found just 54 percent to be opposed to reactors.

一桩涉及伪造零部件质量控制证书的丑闻以及 100 名官员因腐败和贿赂而被起诉的指控帮助韩国能源部做出了这一决定。但日本电力公司的无能也造成了影响，导致公众对核电的支持不断减弱。2013 年 3 月，在日本 "3-11 "事件两周年之际，在 Hangil Research 的一项调查中，63% 的韩国人认为国内反应堆不安全。非营利组织韩国环境运动联合会 2012 年的一项民意调查显示，仅有 54% 的韩国人反对反应堆。



“We should minimize social conflicts regarding atomic energy’s role,” the government panel said in an October 14 statement.

"政府小组在 10 月 14 日的一份声明中说："我们应尽量减少有关原子能作用的社会冲突。



It’s an open question how these social conflicts might affect Korea’s nuclear export business. According to Vivoda, Korea is looking to sell 80 reactors abroad by 2030. “Korean enterprises are among those hoping to pick up overseas contracts at the expense of Japanese companies, and are pursuing opportunities in Jordan, the United Arab Emirates, Turkey, Indonesia, India, China, and Malaysia,” Vivoda said.

这些社会冲突会对韩国的核出口业务产生怎样的影响，这还是个未知数。据 Vivoda 称，韩国希望到 2030 年向海外出售 80 座反应堆。"Vivoda说："韩国企业是希望以日本公司为代价获得海外合同的企业之一，它们正在约旦、阿联酋、土耳其、印度尼西亚、印度、中国和马来西亚寻求机会。



Taiwan has seen its own Fukushima-related backlash. On March 11, 2013, the second anniversary of Japan’s disaster, more than 68,000 protesters took to the streets to halt the completion of the island’s fourth nuclear power plant. The state-run Taiwan Power Co. had already missed a deadline to start commercial operations on the nearly $9 billion nuclear power plant project at the end of 2012. Now, President Ma Ying-jeou faces a seemingly impossible balancing act: making good on a pledge to reduce carbon emissions to year-2000 levels by 2025, while also phasing out nuclear power, which generates one-fifth of Taiwan’s electricity.

台湾也出现了与福岛相关的反弹。2013 年 3 月 11 日，日本灾难两周年之际，超过 68,000 名抗议者走上街头，阻止岛内第四座核电站的竣工。国营的台湾电力公司（Taiwan Power Co.现在，马英九总统面临着一个看似不可能的平衡之举：既要兑现到 2025 年将碳排放量减少到 2000 年水平的承诺，又要逐步淘汰占台湾发电量五分之一的核电。



Like Japan, Taiwan lies on the Pacific Ring of Fire, an area bordering the Pacific Ocean that is tectonically active. Taiwan’s three nuclear plants are near the ocean and the island sits on a variety of geological fractures, or faults. A 1999 earthquake southwest of Taipei killed about 2,500 people. Another in December 2006 halted Taiwan’s number three nuclear power station and prompted inspections.

与日本一样，台湾也位于太平洋火环上，该地区濒临太平洋，地壳构造活跃。台湾的三座核电站靠近海洋，岛屿位于各种地质断裂或断层上。1999 年台北西南部发生的地震造成约 2500 人死亡。2006 年 12 月的另一场地震导致台湾第三核电站停运，并引发了检查。



What about Indonesia, another Ring of Fire neighbor? The world’s fourth-most-populous nation plans to run four nuclear plants by 2025. “With growing electricity shortages, Indonesia is unlikely to halt its plan to build its first nuclear-power plant,” Vivoda said. “It claims its plants will be safe, thanks to the use of more advanced technology than the four-decade-old Fukushima reactors.” Thailand, too, is keeping to its plan to build five plants over the next two decades. Vietnam has contracts with Russia and Japan to build as many as four nuclear plants. Malaysia and Bangladesh each plan to build reactors.

另一个 "环太平洋火山带 "邻国印度尼西亚的情况又如何呢？这个世界第四人口大国计划在 2025 年前运行四座核电站。"Vivoda说："随着电力短缺问题日益严重，印尼不太可能停止建造其第一座核电站的计划。"印尼声称，由于采用了比已有四十年历史的福岛核反应堆更先进的技术，其核电站将是安全的。泰国也在坚持在未来二十年内建造五座核电站的计划。越南与俄罗斯和日本签订了建造多达四座核电站的合同。马来西亚和孟加拉国都计划建造反应堆。



The lessons from Fukushima reverberated through Europe, even in nations like Germany that boast strong safety and negligible seismic risk. Pre-Fukushima, nuclear power supplied about a quarter of Germany’s energy. Post-Fukushima, Chancellor Angela Merkel is seeking to get 80 percent of electricity from renewables by 2050 from about 23 percent now. While Merkel is bowing to a public backlash against reactors, she is struggling to contain the cost of renewable-energy subsidies stressing the national budget. Switzerland has taken a similar route.

福岛事故的教训在欧洲引起了强烈反响，即使是德国这样以安全性能高、地震风险小而自豪的国家也不例外。福岛事故前，核电供应了德国约四分之一的能源。福岛事故后，德国总理安格拉-默克尔（Angela Merkel）正在寻求到 2050 年将可再生能源发电量从目前的约 23% 提高到 80%。在默克尔屈服于公众对反应堆的反弹的同时，她也在努力控制可再生能源补贴的成本，这给国家预算带来了压力。瑞士也采取了类似的做法。





Yet the biggest risks are in the developing world. Once developing nations do go nuclear, it’s vital that marquee-caliber voices in the private sector speak out. Part of the problem in Japan is the near-absolute power enjoyed by Nippon Keidanren, a passionately pro-nuclear outfit. Anyone who crosses Japan’s main business lobby will find himself on the outside—persona non grata in a nation in which relationships and access are everything. That’s not to say a few mavericks haven’t braved outcast status.

然而，最大的风险在发展中国家。一旦发展中国家开始使用核电，私营部门的知名人士就必须大声疾呼。日本的部分问题在于日本经济团体联合会（Nippon Keidanren）近乎绝对的权力，这是一个热衷于支持核电的组织。在这个关系和渠道决定一切的国家，任何与日本主要商业游说团体交恶的人都会发现自己处于局外人的地位。这并不是说一些特立独行的人没有勇敢地摆脱被排斥的地位。



Masayoshi Son is the 56-year-old chief executive officer of Softbank Corp. The billionaire first cracked the monopolies that dominated Japan’s telecommunications industry. Now he’s working to shake up the utilities market with plans to invest about $1 billion to build 10 solar farms. That means crossing Tepco and other nuclear power merchants by offering alternatives.

孙正义现年 56 岁，是软银公司的首席执行官。这位亿万富翁首先打破了日本电信业的垄断。现在，他正努力撼动公用事业市场，计划投资约 10 亿美元建设 10 个太阳能发电场。这意味着，通过提供替代方案，他将与日本电力公司和其他核电商一决雌雄。



Hiroshi Mikitani, 49, the president of e-commerce giant Rakuten Inc., has been more daring. In mid-2011, he sent shockwaves through Japan Inc. when he quit Nippon Keidanren and started a rival association. In part, his fight is about making corporate Japan nimbler and more entrepreneurial by creating spaces for long-neglected small-to-midsize companies to thrive.

49 岁的电子商务巨头乐天（Rakuten Inc.2011 年年中，他退出日本经济团体联合会（Nippon Keidanren），并成立了一个竞争对手协会，这在日本企业界引起了轩然大波。从某种程度上说，他的斗争是要为长期被忽视的中小型公司创造发展空间，从而使日本企业更加灵活、更具创业精神。



Mikitani is targeting the “Galapagos syndrome” that plagues too many Japanese industries whose products are highly evolved but unable to survive beyond the water’s edge. Rather than coddle such industries, the idea is to unleash the creative destruction emphasized by economist Joseph Schumpeter to encourage corporate Japan to adapt or die.

Mikitani 的目标是 "加拉帕戈斯综合症"，这种综合症困扰着太多的日本产业，它们的产品高度进化，却无法在水边以外的地方生存。我们的想法是释放经济学家约瑟夫-熊彼特（Joseph Schumpeter）所强调的创造性破坏，鼓励日本企业要么适应，要么死亡，而不是溺爱这些行业。



But Mikitani, whose birthday is, coincidentally, March 11, has made the most waves by taking on the Tokyo establishment’s contention that the economy will collapse if Japan gives up on nuclear power. This canard is also being refuted by perhaps the unlikeliest of public figures: Junichiro Koizumi, Abe’s political mentor. Koizumi sent shockwaves through Nagatacho with an October 2 speech to business executives in Nagoya, in which he declared his opposition to nuclear power.

不过，三木谷的生日恰巧是 3 月 11 日，他对东京当权者关于日本放弃核电就会导致经济崩溃的论点提出了质疑，从而掀起了最大的波澜。这一谬论也遭到了最不可能的公众人物的驳斥：小泉纯一郎，安倍晋三的政治导师。10 月 2 日，小泉在名古屋对企业高管发表演讲，宣布反对核电，这在名古屋引起了震动。



“There is nothing more costly than nuclear power,” Koizumi said, marking an about-face from his early support of the industry. As prime minister from 2001 to 2006, Koizumi referred to Japan as “a nation built on nuclear power” and ended tax-funded subsidies for solar panel companies to preserve the supremacy of reactors. Abe was less than impressed, saying: “It’s irresponsible to promise at this point to scrap nuclear energy.”

小泉说："没有什么比核电更昂贵的了，"这标志着他与早期支持核电产业的态度大相径庭。作为 2001 年至 2006 年的首相，小泉将日本称为 "建立在核电基础上的国家"，并终止了对太阳能电池板公司的税收补贴，以维护反应堆的至高无上地位。安倍对此不以为然，他说"此时承诺废除核能是不负责任的"。



Koizumi’s siding with the anti-nuclear movement is important for two reasons. First, he’s an extraordinarily perceptive politician with a unique ability to read the public zeitgeist and sell sweeping change to the masses. Second, and more important, he is calling for a kind of Manhattan Project in reverse. The reference here is to the U.S. project that produced the nuclear weapons that leveled Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945. What Koizumi envisions is an ambitious plan to do the opposite and rid Japan of the reactors the public has come to fear. What’s more, Koizumi believes, Japanese are likely to rally around such a call for action.

小泉支持反核运动有两个重要原因。首先，他是一位极具洞察力的政治家，具有解读公众思潮并向大众推销全面变革的独特能力。其次，更重要的是，他正在呼吁一种反向的曼哈顿计划。这里指的是美国的曼哈顿计划，该计划制造了核武器，1945 年广岛和长崎被夷为平地。小泉所设想的是一个反其道而行之的雄心勃勃的计划，让日本摆脱公众所恐惧的反应堆。更重要的是，小泉相信，日本人很可能会团结在这样一个行动号召的周围。



“If the Liberal Democratic Party were to adopt a policy of no nukes, the public mood would rise in an instant,” Koizumi declared. “The Japanese are masters at turning a pinch into a new chance.” On October 25, 2013, Koizumi doubled down and called politicians who champion the nuclear industry “irresponsible.”

"小泉宣称："如果自民党采取无核政策，民众的情绪将瞬间高涨。"日本人是将紧要关头转化为新机遇的高手。"2013 年 10 月 25 日，小泉加倍强硬，称支持核工业的政客 "不负责任"。



Abe’s failure to do just that is not only a blow to the success of his Abenomics, but a cautionary tale for other seismically active nations pursuing nuclear power. “Fukushima gives the opening that if they really want to get off nukes, then they really have to go and do something else,” said David Suzuki, a Canadian author, environmentalist, geneticist, and Japan Renewable Energy Foundation board member.

安倍晋三未能做到这一点，不仅是对其安倍经济学成功的打击，也给其他追求核电的地震活跃国家敲响了警钟。"加拿大作家、环境学家、遗传学家、日本可再生能源基金会董事会成员大卫-铃木（David Suzuki）说："福岛事故给我们提供了一个机会，如果他们真的想放弃核电，那么他们真的必须去做别的事情。



Suzuki worries Japan is wasting a once-in-a-century opportunity to push alternative forms of energy. In the year ended March 2012, for example, only about 7.4 percent of primary energy came from renewables, with 3.4 percent from hydro and 4 percent from others such as solar, geothermal, and wind, according to data compiled by Bloomberg New Energy. In 2013, high-tech Japan trailed developing China in solar power.

铃木担心，日本正在浪费百年一遇的推广替代能源的机会。例如，根据彭博新能源公司（Bloomberg New Energy）编制的数据，在截至2012年3月的一年中，只有约7.4%的一次能源来自可再生能源，其中3.4%来自水力发电，4%来自太阳能、地热和风能等其他能源。2013 年，高科技的日本在太阳能发电方面落后于发展中的中国。



The greatest hope for Japan may be its vast geothermal resources, which are mostly harnessed by the nation’s hot-spring and tourism industries. “Geothermal can be a huge source of energy very quickly,” Suzuki said. He believes Japan is also well positioned to take advantage of developments in tidal power on its way to being the “poster boy for renewable energy for the future.”

日本最大的希望可能是其丰富的地热资源，这些资源主要被日本的温泉和旅游业所利用。"铃木说："地热可以很快成为巨大的能源。他认为，日本也完全有能力利用潮汐发电的发展，成为 "未来可再生能源的榜样"。



Among its many advantages, geothermal energy offers a more stable supply of energy than, say, wind and solar, which fluctuate with breezes and clouds. In a May report, the Washington-based Geothermal Energy Association said Japan could potentially produce 23,000 megawatts of geothermal power. That promise, coupled with Koizumi’s support for an already lively grassroots anti-nuclear movement, could be the catalyst Japan needs to become not only an energy leader but a role model.

与风能和太阳能等随微风和云层变化的能源相比，地热能具有许多优势，其中包括提供更稳定的能源供应。总部设在华盛顿的地热能源协会在 5 月份的一份报告中称，日本有可能生产 23,000 兆瓦的地热能。这一承诺，再加上小泉对已经十分活跃的基层反核运动的支持，可能会成为日本不仅成为能源领导者，而且成为榜样所需的催化剂。



To his credit, Abe is indeed moving to bolster clean energy. Some of the most promising projects involve giant windmills, some of which will be floating in the sea. An October 24 New York Times article detailed plans to generate over 1 gigawatt of electricity from 140 wind turbines by 2020—equivalent to the power produced by a nuclear reactor. According to the Times, the government will spend 22 billion yen building the first three wind turbines off the coast of Fukushima. After that, a consortium of 11 companies, including Hitachi Ltd., Marubeni Corp., Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd., and Shimizu Corp., will commercialize the project.

值得称赞的是，安倍晋三确实正在采取行动支持清洁能源。一些最有前景的项目涉及巨型风车，其中一些将漂浮在海上。10 月 24 日《纽约时报》的一篇文章详细介绍了到 2020 年用 140 台风力涡轮机发电超过 1 千兆瓦的计划--相当于一个核反应堆的发电量。据《纽约时报》报道，政府将斥资 220 亿日元在福岛海岸建造首批三台风力涡轮机。之后，由日立制作所、丸红株式会社、三菱重工株式会社和清水株式会社等 11 家公司组成的财团将把该项目商业化。



While that sounds great, Abe would have to forsake the all-powerful nuclear village. One sign his party lacks the courage to do so is the proposals to combine 50 operable reactors into a single company that would be owned by Japan’s nine regional utilities and wholesalers Japan Atomic Power Co. and Electric Power Development Co. The central government and local reactor makers would give financial and technical support. There’s some merit to the idea. A portion of the profit from sales of electricity would go toward the cleanup of Tokyo Electric Power Co.’s wrecked Fukushima atomic station and victim compensation, which combined may cost more than 11 trillion yen. But such an endeavor would be about rebuilding the nuclear industry’s clout and expanding the export of reactors, not finding alternatives.

虽然这听起来不错，但安倍晋三必须放弃叱咤风云的核电站村。安倍缺乏这样做的勇气的一个迹象是，他提议将 50 座可运行的反应堆合并为一家公司，由日本九家地区公用事业公司和批发商日本原子能电力公司和电力开发公司拥有。中央政府和地方反应堆制造商将提供资金和技术支持。这个想法有一定道理。电力销售利润的一部分将用于东京电力公司福岛核电站的清理工作和受害者赔偿，这两项工作的总费用可能超过 11 万亿日元。但这样做的目的是重建核工业的影响力，扩大反应堆的出口，而不是寻找替代品。



Therein lies the lesson for less-developed nations eyeing a nuclear future: Don’t give it so much clout and influence that it becomes the tail wagging the dog. That brings us to the what. Fukushima is a growing embarrassment for Japan on the international stage. Another earthquake—a live possibility—could damage Fukushima anew or take out another reactor between now and the 2020 Summer Olympics. The world won’t give Japan a pass twice on what would have been a perfectly preventable disaster. Analysts are rating Abe on his success in cleaning up Japan’s finances. Posterity will judge him on whether he cleaned up the mess Tepco and the nuclear village have created.

这也是希望拥有核未来的欠发达国家应该吸取的教训：不要赋予它太多的影响力，以免它成为摇尾乞怜的狗。这让我们想到了什么。福岛核事故让日本在国际舞台上日益尴尬。从现在到 2020 年夏季奥运会期间，另一场地震--一种现实的可能性--可能会对福岛造成新的破坏，或摧毁另一个反应堆。在这场完全可以避免的灾难上，世界不会再放过日本两次。分析家们对安倍的评价是他在清理日本财政方面取得的成功。后人将根据他是否收拾了日本电力公司和核电站村造成的烂摊子来评价他。





The plot thickens when you consider the government’s efforts to make it harder for the public to know what’s happening in Fukushima. It’s perhaps the ultimate irony: Abe is so obsessed with China eclipsing Japan on the global stage that he’s adopting some of his neighbor’s policies. What else can we say about the secrecy law the prime minister’s cabinet approved in October 2013 and the parliament passed in December 2013, an act that undermines and constrains his people’s right to know?

如果考虑到安倍政府想方设法让公众更难了解福岛发生的事情，那么事情就更加扑朔迷离了。这也许是最大的讽刺：安倍晋三如此执着于中国在全球舞台上令日本黯然失色，以至于他采用了邻国的一些政策。对于首相内阁于 2013 年 10 月批准、国会于 2013 年 12 月通过的保密法，我们还能说什么呢？



LDP bigwigs say the move—which gives ministries the authority to classify as state secrets information on counterintelligence, counterterrorism, defense, and diplomacy—was necessary to protect the nation’s people from any number of risks. It claims this is a necessary step toward creating a U.S.-style national security council and safely sharing vital intelligence with allies. And in the aftermath of the Edward Snowden/Bradley Manning leaks that have the United States reexamining its secrecy policies, why shouldn’t Japan do something similar?

自民党大佬们说，此举授权各部委将反间谍、反恐、国防和外交方面的信息列为国家机密，是保护国民免受各种风险的必要之举。政府声称，这是建立美国式的国家安全委员会并与盟国安全共享重要情报的必要步骤。爱德华-斯诺登/布拉德利-曼宁的泄密事件让美国重新审视其保密政策，在这种情况下，日本为什么不能做类似的事情呢？



But the party didn’t offer definitions or guidelines for what constitutes a “special secret.” Compare that with the specifics about the jail terms journalists can expect for disclosing something that someone, somewhere, somehow might label national-security-caliber info: as much as 5 years. Government officials who blow the whistle on improprieties could get as much as 10 years. But the vagueness of this law, its disturbing ambiguity, will have a further chilling effect on a national media that are already too docile. If you think it’s hard to follow the state of play with the Fukushima nuclear crisis now, just wait until the next radiation leak occurs and the media are kept out of the loop. It’s a clear example of Abe borrowing a page from the Communist Party playbook. That page refers to curbs Beijing wants to impose on Hong Kong and the imprisonment threats it is using to police the Internet on the mainland.

但对于什么是 "特殊机密"，该党并没有给出定义或指导方针。相比之下，如果记者披露了某些人、某些地方、某些方面可能会标注为国家安全级别的信息，他们可能会被判处长达 5 年的监禁。揭发不当行为的政府官员则可能被判 10 年监禁。但这部法律的模糊性、令人不安的含糊性，将对已经过于温顺的国家媒体产生进一步的寒蝉效应。如果你认为现在很难了解福岛核危机的事态发展，那就等着下一次发生辐射泄漏而媒体却被排除在外吧。这显然是安倍借鉴了共产党的游戏规则。这一页指的是北京希望对香港实施的限制措施，以及它用来控制大陆互联网的监禁威胁。



Abe is no Mao Zedong, nor is he the rabid anti-free-speech crusader that current China President Xi Jinping is proving to be. But Abe’s state-secrets edict puts Japan on a dubious trajectory that damages its national governance and, ultimately, its global standing. It gives government staffers scope to protect anything they deem controversial or inconvenient. Ministries would have clear incentives to label every document they can “top secret.” Sources will now become scarce on all manner of misdeeds and abuses of power involving everything from public safety to official corruption to government overreach.

安倍不是毛泽东，也不是现任中国国家主席习近平那样狂热的反言论自由斗士。但安倍的国家机密法令将日本推上了一条可疑的轨道，损害了日本的国家治理，并最终损害了日本的全球地位。它给政府工作人员提供了保护任何他们认为有争议或不方便的东西的空间。各部委会有明确的动机，将他们能够得到的每一份文件都标为 "绝密"。从公共安全到官员腐败再到政府越权，各种不端行为和滥用权力的信息来源将变得稀缺。



“The most serious problem is that excessive secrecy creates the ideal environment for government wrongdoing,” says Lawrence Repeta, a law professor at Tokyo’s Meiji University. “This is the most disturbing lesson learned from the Manning and Snowden affairs.”

"东京明治大学法学教授劳伦斯-雷佩塔说："最严重的问题是，过度保密为政府的不法行为创造了理想的环境。"这是从曼宁和斯诺登事件中吸取的最令人不安的教训"。



Manning, of course, is the 26-year-old U.S. soldier convicted in August of leaking thousands of classified documents to Julian Assange’s WikiLeaks. Snowden, 30, is the former computer-security contractor accused of leaking classified intelligence information. Their actions made the United States even more reticent about sharing intelligence globally, and Japan’s ability to keep secrets is far from airtight. Abe may believe the new law will endear Japan to its most important ally.

当然，曼宁是 26 岁的美国士兵，今年 8 月被判向朱利安-阿桑奇的维基解密泄露数千份机密文件。斯诺登，30 岁，前计算机安全承包商，被控泄露机密情报信息。他们的行为让美国对全球共享情报更加缄默，而日本的保密能力也远非密不透风。安倍可能认为，新法将使日本与其最重要的盟友更加亲近。



But the potential for abuse, overreach, and corruption from this China-like step abounds. It means that a government bureaucrat or regulator who, say, discloses details of a radiation leak at the crippled Fukushima power plant could end up in handcuffs, as could the reporter. Might the same fate befall an employee at Tepco who reveals a new mishap? That remains to be seen. The Japanese media are already prone to self-censorship for fear of alienating advertisers or losing access to sources.

但是，这种类似中国的做法存在滥用、越权和腐败的可能性。这意味着，如果政府官员或监管机构披露了瘫痪的福岛发电厂的辐射泄漏细节，那么记者也可能被戴上手铐。披露新事故的日本电力公司员工是否会遭遇同样的命运？这还有待观察。日本媒体已经很容易进行自我审查，生怕疏远广告商或失去消息来源。



All this means that a reporter who gets wind of a Japanese politician running a massive slush fund might be wary of writing a story the nation needs to read. It means a government official miffed about a major Japanese company or bank having links to organized crime would keep quiet, or that a public-health crisis might never come to light. What about a report about the Bank of Japan’s behind-the-scenes maneuvers to avert a bond-market crash? Again, we can’t say. How about a journalist detailing the specifics of what Abe told President Obama at a bilateral meeting? Would that be a crime? There are many implications to what Abe is proposing. For one thing, it dovetails with his desire to rewrite Japan’s postwar constitution, which was drafted by the United States in ways that put civic duty before civil rights. For another, it has uncomfortable parallels with the secrecy state that prevailed before World War II.

所有这一切都意味着，如果一名记者得知日本政客拥有巨额贿赂基金，他在撰写一篇全国人民都需要阅读的报道时可能会有所顾忌。这意味着，一位对日本某大公司或银行与有组织犯罪有关联感到不满的政府官员会保持沉默，或者一场公共卫生危机可能永远不会曝光。那么，关于日本央行幕后操纵以避免债券市场崩溃的报道呢？我们同样不能说。如果有记者详细报道安倍晋三在双边会谈中对奥巴马总统说的话呢？这会是犯罪吗？安倍晋三的提议有很多含义。首先，这与他重写日本战后宪法的愿望不谋而合，而日本宪法是由美国起草的，其中将公民义务置于公民权利之上。另一方面，这与二战前盛行的保密状态有着令人不安的相似之处。



No one is saying this law will transport Japan back to those dark days. But it’s an unsettling development. At the very least, Abe needs to detail very specifically where the boundaries lie: what exactly a “special secret” is; how such a secret is defined and designated; who gets to decide; the statute of limitations; and the legal process that would make sure justice is preserved. The prime minister needs to ensure there is a robust and transparent independent review process. Limits must be set on the period of confidentiality. The ability to protect secrets forever corrupts. For all Abe’s rhetoric about standing fast against China, he seems happy to emulate his rival to the west in state-control policy and add new momentum to the Fukushima Effect.

没有人说这部法律会让日本回到那个黑暗的时代。但这是一个令人不安的事态发展。至少，安倍需要非常具体地详细说明界限在哪里："特殊机密 "到底是什么；如何定义和指定这种机密；谁有权决定；诉讼时效；以及确保正义得到维护的法律程序。总理需要确保有一个健全而透明的独立审查程序。必须限制保密期限。保护秘密的能力会使人永远堕落。尽管安倍口口声声说要坚决反对中国，但他似乎乐于在国家控制政策方面效仿他的西方对手，并为福岛效应增添新的动力。



Cronyism also impedes Japan’s corporate sector, of which Tepco’s relationship with the government is a microcosm. The workings of Japan Inc. often resemble an M.C. Escher drawing more than what Harvard MBAs are taught. The level of public-/private-sector collusion might make officials in the Philippines and Indonesia blush. If Tepco is Exhibit A, Olympus, home to a $1.7 billion accounting fraud, is easily Exhibit B.

任人唯亲也阻碍了日本企业界的发展，日本电力公司与政府的关系就是其中的一个缩影。日本公司的运作往往更像一幅埃舍尔的画，而不是哈佛 MBA 所教的内容。公私部门勾结的程度可能会让菲律宾和印度尼西亚的官员脸红。如果说日本电力公司（Tepco）是 A 证物，那么奥林巴斯公司（Olympus）则是 B 证物，该公司曾犯下 17 亿美元的会计欺诈案。



It says a lot when world-weary investors hardened by the shenanigans at Enron Corp., WorldCom Inc., Parmalat SpA, and Wall Street are aghast at a scandal. The cast of characters at the proud Japan Inc. icon founded in 1919 pulled off that feat and more in a drama that became public in late 2011 and played out through 2012 and into 2013 even as Abe pledged to raise Japan’s corporate-governance game. The sordid tale began in October 2011 when Briton Michael Woodford was ousted as chief executive officer amid vague accusations of cultural insensitivity. His firing made for quite a spectacle. Woodford was that rarest of things in a hyper-homogeneous business culture: the non-Japanese CEO, and a press-savvy one with a colorful personality. The mainstream Japanese media were happy to take Olympus at its word. The gaijin just didn’t fit in amid a culture steeped in not being the proverbial “nail that sticks up.”

安然公司（Enron Corp.）、世通公司（WorldCom Inc.）、帕玛拉特公司（Parmalat SpA）和华尔街的丑闻让全世界疲惫不堪的投资者大跌眼镜，这说明了很多问题。在安倍晋三承诺提高日本公司治理水平的同时，这家成立于 1919 年的日本公司的骄傲却在 2011 年末被公之于众，并在 2012 年至 2013 年期间不断上演。这个肮脏的故事始于 2011 年 10 月，英国人迈克尔-伍德福德（Michael Woodford）被含糊地指责为对文化不敏感，因而被解除了首席执行官职务。伍德福德被解雇的消息引起了轩然大波。在高度同质化的商业文化中，伍德福德是最罕见的：非日籍首席执行官，而且是一位精通新闻、个性鲜明的非日籍首席执行官。日本主流媒体对奥林巴斯的话深信不疑。这个外籍人士与奥林巴斯的文化格格不入，因为奥林巴斯的文化就是不做 "竖起来的钉子"。



Not disposed toward going quietly, Woodford reached out to the foreign media. It turned out that Woodford was looking into reports by Japanese magazine FACTA questioning outsized payments associated with a 2008 acquisition of the United Kingdom’s Gyrus Group PLC. FACTA even alleged that some Olympus payments may have gone to “antisocial” elements, a euphemism for organized-crime groups. Far from being rewarded for trying to clean up the 94-year-old Olympus, Woodford was shown the door. He then reached out not only to foreign journalists, but to America’s Federal Bureau of Investigation. Eventually, Olympus bigwigs, including former chairman Tsuyoshi Kikukawa, were arrested and convicted. And in September 2013, Olympus was charged in the United Kingdom for allegedly deceiving auditors. Woodford detailed his own side of the story in his 2012 memoir, Exposure.

伍德福德并没有就此罢休，而是主动联系了外国媒体。原来，伍德福德正在调查日本杂志《FACTA》的报道，该报道质疑奥林巴斯在 2008 年收购英国 Gyrus Group PLC 公司时支付了巨额款项。FACTA 甚至声称，奥林巴斯的一些付款可能流向了 "反社会 "分子，这是有组织犯罪集团的委婉说法。伍德福德不但没有因为试图清理有 94 年历史的奥林巴斯而得到奖励，反而被扫地出门。随后，他不仅联系了外国记者，还联系了美国联邦调查局。最终，包括前董事长菊川刚在内的奥林巴斯大佬被捕并被定罪。2013 年 9 月，奥林巴斯因涉嫌欺骗审计师而在英国受到指控。伍德福德在 2012 年出版的回忆录《曝光》中详细讲述了自己的故事。



You might expect this turn of events, dovetailing with the Tepco scandal, to prompt a wholesale reassessment of Japan Inc.’s clubby ways—and you would be wrong. Not only did Kikukawa receive a suspended sentence, but Abe is backing away from initial pledges to require companies to name outside directors as a means of internationalizing Japan’s corporate culture and attracting more overseas investment. Abe’s latest proposal only requires companies to justify the lack of outside directors without forcing them to appoint any.

你可能会认为，这一事件与日本电力公司丑闻的发生会促使人们对日本公司的俱乐部方式进行全面重新评估，但你错了。菊川不仅被判缓刑，而且安倍还放弃了最初的承诺，即要求公司任命外部董事，以此作为实现日本企业文化国际化和吸引更多海外投资的手段。安倍晋三的最新提案只要求公司说明缺乏外部董事的理由，而不强迫公司任命外部董事。



The reversal is a sizable blow to Abenomics. If Japan wants to double foreign direct investment in Japan to 35 trillion yen by 2020, it must force companies to have at least one outside director and preferably several. According to the Board Director Training Institute of Japan, roughly 90 percent of countries in which global investors trade equities have some form of corporate governance code. Japan basically has none.

这一逆转是对安倍经济学的沉重打击。如果日本想在 2020 年前将对日外国直接投资翻一番，达到 35 万亿日元，就必须迫使公司至少有一名外部董事，最好有几名。根据日本董事培训学院（Board Director Training Institute of Japan）的数据，在全球投资者进行股票交易的国家中，大约 90% 都有某种形式的公司治理规范。而日本基本上没有。



As Abe aids corporate Japan in circling the wagons, the aforementioned iron triangle remains alive and well to squander shareholder value. Why is Japan so reluctant to take steps that would be obvious after the most cursory reading of Peter Drucker’s work? It is partly due to the stubborn belief that the strategies that worked so well for Japan in decades past hold just as much potential today, and that Japan Inc. is still just one government stimulus package of yen depreciation away from reclaiming its former glory.

在安倍晋三协助日本企业绕道而行的同时，上述铁三角依然生机勃勃地挥霍着股东的价值。为什么日本如此不愿意采取那些只要粗略阅读一下彼得-德鲁克的著作就会明白的措施呢？部分原因在于日本人固执地认为，过去几十年对日本行之有效的战略在今天同样具有潜力，而且日本公司距离重现昔日辉煌只差政府的一揽子日元贬值刺激计划。



Master’s of Business Administration programs the world over should add a new course: Olympus 101. For budding business magnates, it would be a timely exercise in how not to handle a crisis, run a major company, or manage the third-biggest economy. This, too, is proof of the durability of Japan’s way of doing business even after 3/11. Even in modern times, says Temple University’s Jeff Kingston, “many influential advocates in the iron triangle believe that introducing risk through market-oriented, structural reforms involving deregulation and privatization is the cure for ongoing economic stagnation and low growth in productivity. These advocates believe Japan’s economic problems are due in significant ways to muting of market forces and minimization of risk, and argue that the nation’s prospects are dire if it fails to embrace sweeping reforms that boost productivity and change the inefficient way companies do business and the government runs the economy. It is not obvious to many Japanese, however, that less government intervention, reduced social welfare spending and the unshackling of business from regulations that protect workers’ rights will achieve these goals.”

全世界的工商管理硕士课程都应该增加一门新课程：奥林匹斯 101。对于初出茅庐的商业巨头来说，这将是一次及时的演练，让他们了解如何应对危机、经营大公司或管理第三大经济体。这也证明，即使在 3/11 事件之后，日本的经营方式依然经久不衰。坦普尔大学（Temple University）的杰夫-金斯顿（Jeff Kingston）说，"即使在现代，铁三角中许多有影响力的倡导者也认为，通过以市场为导向、涉及放松管制和私有化的结构性改革来引入风险，是解决经济持续停滞和生产率低增长的良方。这些倡导者认为，日本的经济问题在很大程度上是由于市场力量的弱化和风险的最小化造成的，他们认为，如果日本不能进行全面改革，提高生产率，改变公司经营和政府管理经济的低效率方式，那么日本的前景将是非常严峻的。然而，对许多日本人来说，减少政府干预、减少社会福利支出以及解除企业对保护工人权利的法规的束缚就能实现这些目标，这一点并不明显"。



Rather than iron triangle or M.C. Escher, Woodford prefers to think of corporate Japan through the lens of Lewis Carroll’s 1865 novel, Alice in Wonderland. In many ways, it’s an apt analogy. Japan’s endemic cronyism can indeed seem like a through-the-looking-glass world of fantasy and illusion. After tumbling down the rabbit hole, investors are on their own to make heads or tails of Tokyo’s policies. It often seems like economics in its most surreal form.

比起铁三角或 M.C. 埃舍尔，伍德福德更喜欢从刘易斯-卡罗尔 1865 年的小说《爱丽丝梦游仙境》的视角来看待日本企业。在很多方面，这都是一个恰当的比喻。日本普遍存在的任人唯亲现象，看起来的确就像透过望远镜看到了一个充满幻想和幻觉的世界。在跌入兔子洞后，投资者只能靠自己来理解东京的政策。这往往就像是最超现实的经济学。



Woodford’s own hopes that his experiences and disclosures would shake Japan Inc. to its core have been disappointed. That seemed clear enough in August when Sony Corp. rejected billionaire Daniel Loeb’s proposal to raise cash by selling part of its entertainment business. The frustration felt by Loeb’s Third Point LLC hedge fund was emblematic of how many investors view Sony’s failure to stop Apple Inc. and Samsung Electronics Co. from driving it further toward irrelevance.

伍德福德本人曾希望他的经历和披露的信息能动摇日本公司的核心，但他的希望落空了。今年 8 月，索尼公司拒绝了亿万富翁丹尼尔-勒布（Daniel Loeb）提出的通过出售部分娱乐业务来筹集现金的建议，这一点似乎非常明显。勒布的Third Point LLC对冲基金所感受到的挫败感代表了许多投资者对索尼未能阻止苹果公司和三星电子公司将其进一步推向无关紧要境地的看法。



“The club, meaning corporate Japan, will do everything it can to mask and hide what’s wrong,” Woodford told me when I asked about Sony ignoring advice from a non-Japanese shareholder. “That’s what’s most important.”

"当我问及索尼无视非日本股东建议的问题时，伍德福德告诉我："俱乐部，也就是日本公司，会竭尽全力掩盖和隐藏问题。"这才是最重要的。



The Olympus board also had market pundits questioning whether its shareholders are stupid, xenophobic, or both. It’s an entirely valid question after Woodford was sent packing for the last time in January 2012. After being vindicated in the news media, Woodford raised his hand to return to Olympus and try to salvage a little credibility. Shareholders gave him a definitive “no.” Bizarrely, they preferred to stick with the board that presided over one of corporate Japan’s most shameful scandals rather than a chief executive—Woodford—who showed the courage and transparency Olympus needs to survive this affair.

奥林巴斯董事会还让市场人士质疑其股东是愚蠢、排外还是两者兼而有之。在伍德福德于 2012 年 1 月最后一次被解雇后，这个问题完全有道理。在得到新闻媒体的平反之后，伍德福德举手要求重返奥林巴斯，试图挽回一点信誉。股东们给了他一个明确的 "不 "字。奇怪的是，他们宁愿选择主持了日本企业界最可耻丑闻之一的董事会，也不愿选择首席执行官伍德福德，因为伍德福德展现出了奥林巴斯在这场风波中生存所需的勇气和透明度。



The explanation may lie in shame itself. In 1946, Ruth Benedict, author of the influential book The Chrysanthemum and the Sword, famously dubbed Japan a “shame culture.” Failing, either in the political or corporate realm, can carry a debilitating level of embarrassment, one many Japanese try at all costs to avoid. It explains Japan’s lack of entrepreneurship. Huge Japanese companies can be plenty innovative and have long prided themselves on being world leaders in new patents. Less common is a few young Japanese sitting in a garage, Mark Zuckerberg–style, with a laptop, a dream, and ambitions of starting their own game-changing company. Fear of failure is a powerful thing in Japan. At Olympus, it wasn’t greed or enriching cronies that had executives hiding losses, but fear of losing face. How fascinating it is that Olympus executives would rather risk jail and the total destruction of a 94-year-old company than simply fess up that they, like so many before them, got suckered on some toxic bonds. Consider, too, how Tepco executives hid safety infractions over the years in ways that led to today’s radiation crisis. We will leave the dynamics behind the economics of shame to the psychoanalysts. It’s clear, though, that in Olympus’s case, it played a dominant role in ways the news media have yet to explore.

原因可能在于羞耻感本身。1946 年，颇具影响力的《菊花与剑》一书的作者露丝-本尼迪克特将日本称为 "羞耻文化"。无论是在政治领域还是在企业领域，失败都会带来令人沮丧的尴尬，许多日本人不惜一切代价避免这种尴尬。这也是日本缺乏企业家精神的原因。日本的大公司创新能力很强，而且长期以来一直以在新专利方面处于世界领先地位而自豪。马克-扎克伯格（Mark Zuckerberg）式的几个日本年轻人坐在车库里，带着一台笔记本电脑、一个梦想和创办自己的改变游戏规则的公司的雄心壮志，这种情况并不常见。在日本，对失败的恐惧是一种强大的力量。在奥林巴斯，让高管们隐瞒损失的不是贪婪，也不是让亲信发财，而是害怕丢脸。奥林巴斯的高管们宁可冒着牢狱之灾和彻底毁掉一家拥有 94 年历史的公司的风险，也不愿承认他们和之前的许多人一样，被一些有毒债券所骗，这是多么令人着迷啊。再想想，多年来，特普高管是如何隐瞒安全违规行为，从而导致了今天的辐射危机。我们将把羞耻经济学背后的动力留给心理分析家去研究。但显而易见的是，在奥林巴斯的案例中，羞耻感以新闻媒体尚未探究的方式发挥了主导作用。



Woodford’s experience explains so much about what’s wrong with corporate Japan: why it’s standing still as the rest of the world races forward; how opacity destroys dynamism and wealth; the groupthink that prizes the status quo over change; how a compliant Japanese media don’t hold leaders accountable; the lack of women in places of power; the antipathy toward foreign ideas; and a culture that believes a public apology for missteps is punishment enough. All this could be applied as much to Japanese politics as to corporate life.

伍德福德的经历解释了日本企业的许多问题：为什么世界其他国家都在飞速发展，而日本却停滞不前；不透明如何破坏活力和财富；群体思维重现状而轻变革；唯唯诺诺的日本媒体如何不追究领导人的责任；女性在权力场所的缺失；对外国思想的反感；以及认为对失误公开道歉就是足够惩罚的文化。所有这些既适用于日本政治，也适用于企业生活。



One reason cronyism is so rampant is Japan’s culture of apology. It’s known as the “corporate money shot,” which I alluded to earlier with Yamaichi’s Nozawa and Toyota’s Toyoda. Many in the Japanese media seem to live for scenes of corporate executives or government officials bowing in shame before the cameras. Tears are often part of the show as the high-and-mighty fall on their proverbial swords to take responsibility for some misdeed or scandal. The practice is meant to break with the past and progress forward. And it’s a lot of bunk, really. It has become a cynical public relations tool to offer the perception of contrition and change before returning to business as usual.

裙带关系如此猖獗的原因之一是日本的道歉文化。这就是所谓的 "企业金钱镜头"，我在前面提到的山一公司的野泽和丰田公司的丰田。许多日本媒体似乎都喜欢企业高管或政府官员在镜头前羞愧低头的场景。当这些达官贵人为自己的不当行为或丑闻承担责任时，泪水往往是表演的一部分。这种做法旨在与过去决裂，向前迈进。但实际上，这只是一种铺张浪费。它已成为一种玩世不恭的公关工具，让人觉得他们在恢复如常之前进行了忏悔和改变。



It’s intriguing, then, that some want Wall Street titans to learn from this custom and be more Japanese. “I’ve suggested it wouldn’t be a bad thing that the leadership of these institutions would take a Japanese-style approach to corporate governance,” U.S. Senator Charles Grassley was quoted as saying in October 2008 by Iowa’s Daily Nonpareil. “And I’m not talking about going out and committing suicide as some Japanese do in these circumstances, but I am talking about scenes I’ve seen on television where in belly-up corporations the CEOs go before the board of directors, before the public, before the stockholders and bow deeply and apologize for their mismanagement. Something like that happening among Wall Street executives would go a long way toward satisfying my constituents” worried about legislation that seems to bail out rich investors.

因此，一些人希望华尔街巨头学习这种习惯，变得更日本化，这就耐人寻味了。"美国参议员查尔斯-格拉斯利（Charles Grassley）在 2008 年 10 月被爱荷华州的《每日新闻》（Daily Nonpareil）引述说："我曾建议，这些机构的领导层采取日本式的公司治理方法并非坏事。"我不是说要像一些日本人在这种情况下那样去自杀，而是说我在电视上看到过这样的场景：在倒闭的公司里，首席执行官在董事会、公众和股东面前深深鞠躬，为自己的管理不善道歉。在华尔街高管中发生这样的事情，将大大有助于满足我的选民 "对似乎是为了救助富有投资者的立法的担忧"。



It’s hard to decide where to start. First, what the Iowa Republican suggests isn’t going to happen; Wall Street lawyers wouldn’t allow it. Second, Grassley’s faith in the sincerity of apologizing bigwigs is misplaced. For Japanese executives at confectionary companies selling tainted food, tire companies shilling defective treads, or nuclear-power plants playing loose with safety requirements, bowing publicly is about deflecting blame, not repairing problems. Of course, Grassley does have a point about the appalling lack of shame on Wall Street. The pinstripe set did itself no favors by wearing an air of entitlement as unemployment rose, 401(k) accounts shriveled, and politicians used, as of the date of Grassley’s comments, $700 billion of public funds to patch up their recklessness. It would be grand to see America’s biggest corporate villains of the time—Edward Liddy of American International Group, Lloyd Blankfein at Goldman Sachs Group, John Thain of Merrill Lynch, and Richard Fuld of Lehman Brothers—ask for forgiveness at a time when even then–Pope Benedict XVI complained the financial system is “built on sand” and the massive bank bailout seemed immoral.

很难决定从何说起。首先，爱荷华州共和党人的建议是不可能实现的；华尔街的律师不会允许这样做。其次，格拉斯利对道歉大佬诚意的信任是错误的。对于销售有毒食品的糖果公司、兜售有缺陷胎面的轮胎公司或玩弄安全要求的核电站的日本高管来说，公开鞠躬只是为了转移责任，而不是解决问题。当然，格拉斯利对华尔街令人震惊的不知羞耻行为的看法确实有道理。在失业率上升、401（K）账户萎缩、政客们动用截至格拉斯利发表评论之日的 7000 亿美元公共资金来修补他们的鲁莽行为时，华尔街的细条纹套装们却摆出一副理所当然的样子，这对他们自己毫无益处。美国当时最大的企业恶棍--美国国际集团的爱德华-利迪（Edward Liddy）、高盛集团的劳埃德-布兰克费恩（Lloyd Blankfein）、美林证券的约翰-泰恩（John Thain）和雷曼兄弟的理查德-富尔德（Richard Fuld）--在连当时的教皇本笃十六世（Benedict XVI）都抱怨金融体系是 "建立在沙子上的"、大规模的银行救助似乎不道德的情况下请求宽恕，这将是一件非常了不起的事情。



What clues does Japan’s lost decade offer? There are some definite similarities even if the magnitude was different. Richard Katz of the Oriental Economist Report estimates that Japan’s bad loans amounted to about 20 percent of GDP, while Congress’s bailout is closer to 5 percent of GDP. What of Grassley’s views on Japanese corporate governance? Is Japan’s system any better? The most important lesson nations can learn from Japan’s experience during the 1990s and early 2000s is the importance of acting quickly and forcefully. And while Japanese banks avoided the worst of the 2008 crisis that began with subprime loans, they were more lucky than right. The conservatism that kept Japanese capital away from hard-to-value securities such as collateralized debt obligations (and according to Finance Minister Aso, bad English skills) explains why Asia’s biggest economy was so vulnerable once global growth slowed.

日本失去的十年提供了哪些线索？尽管程度不同，但还是有一些明确的相似之处。据《东方经济学家报告》的理查德-卡茨估计，日本的不良贷款约占国内生产总值的 20%，而美国国会的救助额接近国内生产总值的 5%。格拉斯利对日本公司治理的看法如何？日本的制度是否更好？各国可以从日本 20 世纪 90 年代和 21 世纪初的经验中学到的最重要的一课就是迅速而有力地采取行动的重要性。虽然日本银行躲过了始于次贷的 2008 年最严重的危机，但他们更多的是幸运而非正确。保守主义使日本资本远离抵押债务凭证等难以估价的证券（据日本财务大臣麻生称，这与糟糕的英语水平有关），这也解释了为什么一旦全球经济增长放缓，亚洲最大的经济体会如此脆弱。



As Wall Street reeled in 2008, there was a triumphal air coursing through Tokyo. Japanese banks even saw themselves as financial white knights, buying sizable stakes overseas, a trend highlighted by Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group Inc.’s $9 billion investment in Morgan Stanley. That missed the point on two fronts: First, the phenomenon highlighted Japan’s desire to have globalization both ways. Just imagine the uproar if the tables were reversed and amid a global crisis Morgan Stanley sought to buy a 21 percent stake in Japan’s biggest bank. The reluctance to welcome foreign investment holds back growth. Second, Japan’s vulnerabilities were rapidly coming to light. Even with short-term interest rates near zero, banks are stingy about making new loans, while businesses and consumers are reluctant to borrow. Japan was simply too reliant on exports as global growth slid.

2008 年，华尔街一片萧条，东京却洋溢着胜利的气息。日本银行甚至将自己视为金融白武士，在海外购买大量股份，三菱日联金融集团公司对摩根士丹利的 90 亿美元投资凸显了这一趋势。这在两个方面都没有达到目的：首先，这一现象凸显了日本希望全球化两全其美的愿望。试想一下，如果情况相反，摩根士丹利在全球危机中寻求收购日本最大银行 21% 的股份，将会引起多大的骚动。不欢迎外国投资阻碍了经济增长。其次，日本的脆弱性正在迅速显现。即使短期利率接近于零，银行也吝于发放新贷款，而企业和消费者则不愿借贷。在全球经济增长下滑的情况下，日本对出口的依赖程度实在太高。



Another problem with Japan’s apology culture is it helps corporate miscreants escape responsibility. Almost three years after an earthquake in Japan touched off the worst nuclear crisis since Chernobyl, many are still asking this simple question: Who’s going to jail? The news media have been distracted by the obvious and safe questions: How well did the government respond? Whither the devastated northeast? What’s the economic effect? When might nuclear reactors mothballed since then reopen? Yet the “anniversary” articles sure to fill newspapers on March 11 are sure to miss the point. Anniversaries commemorate events in the past, ones for which there is a modicum of closure. Radiation is still venting into the air around Fukushima and spent fuel rods are still sitting out in the open air. Makeshift equipment, some held in place by tape, is keeping vital reactor systems operating. Is Japan’s 3/11 history? Not unless we change the definition. And the government’s new secrecy law will make reporting on the true state of Fukushima impossible to assess independently.

日本道歉文化的另一个问题是，它帮助企业不法分子逃避责任。在日本地震引发切尔诺贝利事故以来最严重的核危机近三年后，许多人仍在问这个简单的问题：谁会坐牢？新闻媒体一直被一些显而易见的安全问题所困扰：政府的反应如何？满目疮痍的东北地区何去何从？经济影响如何？此后停运的核反应堆何时能重启？然而，3 月 11 日报纸上必将充斥的 "周年纪念 "文章肯定会忽略重点。周年纪念是为了纪念过去发生的事件，而这些事件已经略有结束。辐射仍在福岛周围的空气中扩散，乏燃料棒仍在露天放置。一些用胶带固定的临时设备仍在维持重要反应堆系统的运行。日本的 3/11 已经成为历史了吗？除非我们改变定义。而政府的新保密法将使有关福岛真实情况的报道无法独立评估。





What the third anniversary of the disaster requires is a dose of accountability. We need a few good perp-walks by current and past Tepco executives, whose arrogance, negligence, and corruption sent radiation clouds Tokyo’s way. Next on the docket should be the government officials who enabled what more closely resembles an organized-crime syndicate than an energy sector. For years, this crowd ignored warnings of a 3/11-like catastrophe. When it occurred, they claimed the tsunami was beyond anything anyone ever imagined. In March 2012, then–Prime Minister Noda disappointed the nation when he concluded that no individual could be held responsible for the nuclear fallout and that everyone should “share the pain.”

在灾难三周年之际，我们需要的是问责。我们需要让现任和前任东京电力公司高管好好走一走，因为他们的傲慢、疏忽和腐败让东京遭受了辐射云的侵袭。下一个被起诉的应该是政府官员，他们的所作所为更像是一个有组织犯罪集团，而不是一个能源部门。多年来，这些人对类似 "3-11 "灾难的警告置若罔闻。当灾难发生时，他们声称海啸超出了所有人的想象。2012 年 3 月，时任首相野田得出结论说，没有任何个人可以对核泄漏负责，每个人都应该 "分担痛苦"，这让国民感到失望。



It was a jawdropping comment. In the darkest moments of the Fukushima meltdown, Japan considered evacuating Tokyo’s 13-million-plus people. Consider where the Dow Jones Industrial Average and the Stoxx Europe 600 Index might be if the financial capital of one of the three most international currencies were an uninhabitable wasteland. This isn’t the stuff of John le Carre novels or Tom Clancy’s imagination. It’s the reality that Tokyo navigated in 2011. What much of the world forgets about 3/11 is how Noda’s predecessor, Naoto Kan, saved Tokyo. In the days after the earthquake, he got wind that Tepco wanted to evacuate all workers from Fukushima. That would have ensured apocalyptic radiation leaks from more than 10,000 spent fuel rods, which the bright minds at Tepco stored in relatively unprotected pools near the reactors.

这是一个令人瞠目的评论。在福岛核泄漏最黑暗的时刻，日本曾考虑疏散东京的 1300 多万居民。想想看，如果三大国际货币之一的金融之都变成一片无法居住的荒地，道琼斯工业平均指数和斯托克欧洲 600 指数可能会是什么样子。这不是约翰-勒卡雷小说或汤姆-克兰西的想象。这是东京在 2011 年面临的现实。关于 3/11 事件，世界上很多人都忘记了野田的前任菅直人是如何拯救东京的。在地震发生后的几天里，他得到消息称，日本电力公司希望从福岛疏散所有工人。这将确保 1 万多根乏燃料棒发生世界末日般的辐射泄漏，日本电力公司的聪明人将这些乏燃料棒存放在反应堆附近相对缺乏保护的水池中。



On March 15, 2011, Kan stormed into Tepco’s headquarters and demanded that its engineers stay on and handle the crisis. Culturally, it was a very un-Japanese thing to do in a nation programmed for propriety. Yet desperate times call for culturally questionable measures, and Kan saved Tokyo. Was his overall leadership state-of-the-art? No; he failed to offer the transparency the citizens of any democracy deserve. Yet Noda’s first act after becoming prime minister in September 2011 was to reverse Kan’s most important policy shift: reining in the nuclear industry and finding energy alternatives in one of the most seismically active nations. With the benefit of hindsight, it’s clear that Kan was a goner the second he took on the alliance of politicians, bureaucrats, and power companies promoting reactors. His proposal to halt plans for 14 new reactors shook the nuclear-industrial complex to its core. The knives came out for Kan, and Japan’s docile media played along.

2011 年 3 月 15 日，菅义伟冲进东京电力公司总部，要求其工程师留下来处理危机。从文化上讲，在一个礼仪之邦，这样做非常不符合日本人的习惯。然而，危急时刻需要采取文化上有问题的措施，菅直人拯救了东京。他的整体领导能力是否一流？不是；他未能提供任何民主国家的公民应有的透明度。然而，野田在 2011 年 9 月就任首相后的第一件事就是扭转菅直人最重要的政策转变：控制核工业，在地震最频繁的国家之一寻找替代能源。事后看来，菅直人在与政客、官僚和电力公司组成的反应堆推广联盟打交道的那一刻，就已经注定要失败。他提出停止建造 14 座新反应堆的计划，这震撼了核工业联合体的核心。菅直人的刀子伸了出来，而日本温顺的媒体也跟着起哄。



Noda made life safe again for the nuclear mob, letting it go with a few public apologies. He gave them a Get-Out-of-Jail-Free card that ensured Japan would learn little from 3/11. It’s funny how the world fixates on Japan’s organized-crime groups. Even the Obama administration is freezing assets of Japan’s largest yakuza network, the Yamaguchi-gumi. What about the nuclear mob? Its members might not have full-body tattoos and missing fingers, but they’re far more dangerous to our planet. Noda says the entire Japanese establishment had been taken in by the “myth of safety” and it’s all a do-over. At the same time, that establishment also propagated the now-laughable argument that nuclear power is clean, safe, and cheap. Clean? Ask Japanese schoolkids who are afraid of the vegetables on their plates. Safe? Not unless we build reactors out of rubber and elevate them on huge shock absorbers. Cheap? Japan will spend hundreds of billions of dollars cleaning up Tepco’s mess.

野田让核暴徒重新过上了安全的生活，公开道歉几句就放他们走了。他给了他们一张 "免罪金牌"，确保日本不会从 "3-11 "事件中学到什么。有趣的是，全世界都在关注日本的有组织犯罪集团。就连奥巴马政府也在冻结日本最大的黑社会网络山口组的资产。那么核黑帮呢？他们的成员可能没有全身纹身和手指缺失，但他们对我们的地球却要危险得多。野田说，整个日本政府都被 "安全神话 "所迷惑，一切都要重来。与此同时，该机构还宣传了一个现在令人发笑的论点，即核电是清洁、安全和廉价的。清洁？问问那些害怕盘子里蔬菜的日本小学生吧。安全？除非我们用橡胶建造反应堆，并用巨大的减震器将其升高。便宜？日本将斥资数千亿美元来收拾日本电力公司的烂摊子。



But no worries—we’re going to share the pain. Why should the nuclear industry and its shareholders pay the bill when Japanese taxpayers can? People are going to jail at Olympus for cooking the books. In 2007, Internet entrepreneur Takafumi Horie of Livedoor Co. was locked up for book cooking. In the 1970s, even a former prime minister went to prison in the Lockheed Corp. scandal. Why is no one in handcuffs for cooking northeastern Japan? Most Japanese don’t want a nuclear future, yet they’re being strong-armed into submission. If that’s not a crime, I’m not sure what is. And if this isn’t an ominous lesson from which the rest of the world should learn, what is?

但不用担心，我们会共同分担痛苦。为什么日本纳税人可以买单，核工业及其股东却要买单？奥林巴斯有人因做假账而锒铛入狱。2007 年，Livedoor 公司的互联网企业家 Takafumi Horie 因篡改账目而入狱。20 世纪 70 年代，甚至有一位前首相因洛克希德公司丑闻而入狱。为什么没有人因为 "烹饪 "日本东北部而戴上手铐？大多数日本人并不想要核未来，但他们却被强力胁迫屈服。如果这还不算犯罪，我就不知道什么才是了。如果这不是世界其他国家应该吸取的不祥教训，那什么才是呢？



The fascinating thing about Kiyoshi Kurokawa’s report on the Fukushima Effect is how the problems he highlighted aren’t confined to the power industry. It takes a village to breed a system corrupt and dangerous enough to create a Tepco, which got away with its negligence for years because of the cozy ties between companies, regulators, bureaucrats, and supposedly independent researchers. Backed by its connections, money, and control of the media, Tepco has brazenly continued to cook its radiation data for the last two and a half years. It matters little that the government is finally commandeering Tepco’s cleanup: The government is Tepco.

黑川清（Kiyoshi Kurokawa）关于福岛效应的报告引人入胜之处在于，他所强调的问题并不局限于电力行业。由于公司、监管机构、官僚和所谓的独立研究人员之间的亲密关系，日本电力公司多年来一直逍遥法外。在关系、金钱和媒体控制的支持下，过去两年半以来，日本电力公司一直在厚颜无耻地篡改辐射数据。政府最终控制了中电集团的清理工作，但这并不重要：日本政府就是日本电力公司。





Chapter 5

Galapagos Nation

How Isolation Stunts Japan’s Evolution

第 5 章 加拉帕戈斯之国与世隔绝如何阻碍日本的发展





No modern nation would fascinate Charles Darwin more than Japan. It’s the highly developed economy that time forgot. It may be sitting amid a sea of epochal change as Asia’s upstarts rise, but its business and political systems generally behave as if the world has been sitting still for decades. Japan is the market equivalent of the endemic species Darwin found on the remote Galapagos islands off Ecuador’s coast. Its products and business customs are highly distinct from anything found elsewhere, but not particularly suited to thriving beyond the water’s edge. Even as deflation has deepened, Japan has refused to turn away from the fossilized policies that are walling it off from an Asia region racing forward. All too many if its companies still have a sepia-toned view of a rapidly globalizing world, refusing to think bigger and more internationally. Welcome to “Galapagos Nation.”

没有哪个现代国家能比日本更让查尔斯-达尔文着迷。它是被时间遗忘的高度发达经济体。随着亚洲后起之秀的崛起，日本可能正处于一场划时代的变革之中，但其商业和政治体系的总体表现却仿佛世界已经静止了几十年。日本就像达尔文在厄瓜多尔沿海偏远的加拉帕戈斯群岛上发现的特有物种一样，是一个市场。它的产品和商业习惯与其他地方的产品和习惯截然不同，但并不特别适合在水边以外的地方发展。即使通货紧缩加剧，日本仍拒绝放弃那些将其与飞速发展的亚洲地区隔离开来的僵化政策。太多的日本公司仍然对迅速全球化的世界抱有一种昏暗的看法，拒绝以更大的视野和更国际化的思维来思考问题。欢迎来到 "加拉帕戈斯国家"。



“Around 1990 Japan was self-satisfied with the economic success, and Japanese people thought that they have nothing to learn from anybody,” Masamoto Yashiro, a legendary banker and private-equity expert, said at a University of Tokyo symposium on October 19, 2013. “This time is over now, and Japan and Japanese corporations must change to regain growth and become competitive again.”

"1990年前后，日本对经济成就感到自满，日本人认为自己没有什么可以向别人学习的，"传奇银行家、私募股权专家雅史郎（Masamoto Yashiro）在2013年10月19日东京大学的一次研讨会上说。"现在这个时代已经过去了，日本和日本企业必须改变，才能重新获得增长，重新具有竞争力。"



Japan, first and foremost, is a nation of paradoxes. Everywhere you turn you find a startling mix of the old and the new, the traditional and the novel, the past and the future. Thousand-year-old temples sit in the shadow of hypermodern skyscrapers. A traveler walking through a modern city of steel and neon can turn a corner and find a narrow alley of classical wood-and-tile buildings. Rustic red lanterns sit in the shadow of the nation’s high-rise future. Japanese will fly across the country and pay $50 for the perfect taste of fish and then wait in line for an hour for Krispy Kreme doughnuts. Japan is home to what is arguably the most refined cuisine, as evidenced by UNESCO’s recently naming its food culturally important and its abundance of Michelin-starred restaurants, but it’s also one of the biggest markets for McDonald’s and Spam! Japan is the third-biggest economy in the world, and yet Korea seems to get more headlines.

日本首先是一个充满矛盾的国家。在这里，新与旧、传统与新颖、过去与未来交织在一起，令人惊叹。千年古刹与超现代摩天大楼相映成趣。在钢筋水泥、霓虹闪烁的现代都市中穿行的旅行者，转过一个街角，就会发现一条由古典木瓦建筑组成的狭窄小巷。古朴的红灯笼掩映着国家高楼林立的未来。日本人会飞越整个国家，花 50 美元购买味道完美的鱼，然后排队一小时购买 Krispy Kreme 甜甜圈。日本拥有堪称最精致的美食，联合国教科文组织（UNESCO）最近将日本美食命名为具有重要文化意义的美食，日本还拥有众多米其林星级餐厅，但日本同时也是麦当劳和 Spam 最大的市场之一！日本是世界第三大经济体，但韩国似乎更受关注。



In a nation of paradoxes, Japan’s lack of innovation is a standout. In its latest Global Competitiveness Index, the World Economic Forum ranks Japan ninth after the Netherlands and Hong Kong and just ahead of the United Kingdom. Such surveys, and that goes for the Economist Intelligence Unit and others, often rank Japan as one of the most innovative countries based on the number of patents per million of population and other criteria. The trouble is, the vast majority of those patents are held by Japan’s biggest companies. The regulatory structure favors giants over startups, which exacerbates the concentration of new ideas in a handful of corporate boardrooms. Technology is an area to which the so-called Galapagos Syndrome is most immediately applicable. The industry often gives little regard to tapping new markets overseas. It makes, for example, cutting-edge mobile phones with more functions than the average user could ever need, yet with features and functions that differ markedly from global standards. As the population shrinks, Japan needs to think bigger and more internationally. Why? Globalization is causing a commoditization of the things Japan long did well; now good cars and electronics are coming from virtually anywhere, including China. The only way Japan can thrive is to innovate as rarely before. What Japan lacks is a bunch of sleep-deprived, caffeine-driven Steve Jobs wannabes perched over laptops around the nation creating game-changing products and new industries.

在这个充满矛盾的国家，日本缺乏创新是一个突出的问题。世界经济论坛在其最新的全球竞争力指数中，将日本排在荷兰和香港之后，仅次于英国，位列第九。经济学人》信息部和其他机构的此类调查通常根据每百万人口的专利数量和其他标准，将日本列为最具创新力的国家之一。问题是，这些专利绝大多数由日本最大的公司持有。监管结构有利于巨头而非初创企业，这加剧了新创意集中在少数几家公司会议室的现象。技术是所谓的 "加拉帕戈斯综合症 "最直接适用的领域。该行业往往不重视开拓海外新市场。例如，日本制造的尖端手机，其功能之多超出了普通用户的需要，但其特性和功能却与全球标准大相径庭。随着人口的减少，日本需要有更大的国际视野。为什么？全球化导致日本长期以来擅长的事物商品化；现在，好的汽车和电子产品几乎来自任何地方，包括中国。日本繁荣发展的唯一途径就是进行前所未有的创新。日本缺乏的是一群睡眠不足、咖啡因驱动的史蒂夫-乔布斯（Steve Jobs）崇拜者，他们坐在全国各地的笔记本电脑前，创造出改变游戏规则的产品和新产业。





Technology was the first industry to get trapped on Galapagos. Seduced by a large population of technophiles and enthusiastic shoppers, mobile phone makers saw little reason to go truly global. Any search for explanations why Finnish and Korean phone makers succeeded globally where Japan failed has to consider their much smaller domestic markets. Why has Korean pop music made bigger inroads globally than J-pop? Japan’s large domestic consumer base seemed success enough for singers and record companies. Japan’s business model got more traction in the analog age when all that mattered was making good products. But in the digital age, where networks and connectivity through the Internet matter even more, Japan Inc. has found it hard to compete. Here, think Google Inc. and Yahoo! Inc.

技术行业是第一个被困在加拉帕戈斯的行业。在大量技术爱好者和热情购物者的诱惑下，手机制造商认为没有什么理由真正走向全球。要解释芬兰和韩国手机制造商为何在全球取得成功，而日本却失败了，就必须考虑到它们的国内市场要小得多。为什么韩国流行音乐比日本流行音乐在全球取得了更大的发展？对于歌手和唱片公司来说，日本国内庞大的消费群体似乎已经足够成功。日本的商业模式在模拟时代获得了更多的牵引力，当时最重要的是制造出好的产品。但在数字时代，网络和互联网的连接性更加重要，日本公司发现很难与之竞争。在这里，想想谷歌公司和雅虎公司吧。



Where did Japan first go wrong? “Due to language, culture, comparatively small interchange between Japan’s markets and foreign markets, some technologies and some products evolved in Japan differently than in other markets,” said Gerhard Fasol, president of Tokyo-based technology consulting firm Eurotechnology Japan.

日本首先在哪里出了问题？"总部位于东京的技术咨询公司 Eurotechnology Japan 总裁格哈德-法索尔（Gerhard Fasol）说："由于语言、文化、日本市场与外国市场的交流相对较少等原因，一些技术和产品在日本的发展与其他市场不同。



In part, Japan chose unique Japanese technology standards for mobile phones, mobile TV, and mobile payments in the hope to achieve global adoption of these Japanese standards, and at the same time to make market penetration of Japan’s markets more difficult for foreign companies in these fields—thus giving a competitive advantage to Japanese companies in their home market, Japan.

在某种程度上，日本为移动电话、移动电视和移动支付选择了独特的日本技术标准，希望在全球范围内采用这些日本标准，同时使这些领域的外国公司更难进入日本市场，从而使日本公司在其本土市场--日本--获得竞争优势。





The ways in which the strategy backfired and walled Japan off from greater global markets should be lessons for less-developed markets like Korea and developing ones like China. “In this globalized world, it’s all about making sure what you design, make, and do has relevance and utility far beyond national borders,” said Naomi Fink, founder and CEO of Europacifica Consulting. “It’s the only way to compete and thrive.”

这一战略如何适得其反，如何将日本与更大的全球市场隔离开来，值得韩国等欠发达市场和中国等发展中国家借鉴。"欧洲太平洋咨询公司（Europacifica Consulting）的创始人兼首席执行官纳奥米-芬克（Naomi Fink）说："在这个全球化的世界里，关键是要确保你所设计、制造和做的东西具有超越国界的相关性和实用性。"这是竞争和发展的唯一途径。



It’s ironic when you consider how far ahead of the West Japanese mobile phone makers were in the 2000s, including in sending e-mails, accessing the Internet, the ability to make payments, watching television, and global-positioning systems. But Japanese phones worked on different systems than much of the outside world and brisk sales at home fed complacency. Once smartphones hit the market, Japanese tech companies were caught flatfooted. Apple’s iPhone came out in 2007, and no Japanese carrier has produced a globally plausible competitor.

考虑到 2000 年代日本手机制造商在发送电子邮件、访问互联网、支付能力、观看电视和全球定位系统等方面远远领先于西方国家，这真是一种讽刺。但是，日本手机所使用的系统与外部世界大部分国家不同，国内的畅销也助长了他们的自满情绪。智能手机一上市，日本的科技公司就被打了个措手不及。苹果公司的 iPhone 于 2007 年问世，而日本的运营商却没有生产出一款在全球范围内都能与之匹敌的产品。



In 2010, Sharp Corp. even paid homage to this phenomenon, introducing a Galapagos line of tablet computers. The Osaka-based company consciously chose the name to accentuate the device’s Japaneseness—that its features and functionality stood completely apart from anything else abroad. Yet Sharp fell prey to the economic zeitgeist. Within a year, it announced it would stop selling the line amid dismal sales. Several months later, Mikio Katayama, the Sharp leader who oversaw the introduction of the Galapagos, was out as president, too.

2010 年，夏普公司甚至向这种现象致敬，推出了 Galapagos 系列平板电脑。这家总部位于大阪的公司有意识地选择了这个名字，以突出该设备的日本特色--其特点和功能完全不同于其他任何国外产品。然而，夏普却被经济潮流所左右。不到一年，夏普就宣布停止销售该产品线，因为销量惨淡。几个月后，监督推出 Galapagos 的夏普领导人片山 Mikio 也卸任了总裁一职。



This arrangement served Japan well until around the late 1990s. As deflation set in and the population aged, domestic profits began to suffer. Since then, Galapagos has become an umbrella code word for Japan’s uniqueness and its growing isolation from an increasingly dynamic world.

在 20 世纪 90 年代末之前，日本一直采用这种安排。随着通货紧缩和人口老龄化，国内利润开始受到影响。从那时起，"加拉帕戈斯 "就成了日本独特性和与日益活跃的世界日益隔绝的代名词。



The Galapagosization of Japan can be found beyond the corporate boardroom. Fewer Japanese, for example, are studying or living abroad. A September 2010 survey by Japanese graduate school Sanno Institute of Management was indicative of the trend, finding that two-thirds of white-collar workers don’t want to work overseas—ever. This reluctance to leave Japan is creating an odd generational quirk: Today’s young Japanese are often less international than their fathers.

日本的 "加拉帕戈斯化 "并不局限于公司会议室。例如，在国外学习或生活的日本人越来越少。日本研究生院三野管理学院（Sanno Institute of Management）2010 年 9 月的一项调查表明了这一趋势，该调查发现，三分之二的白领不想在海外工作--永远不想。这种不愿离开日本的心理正在形成一种奇怪的代际怪圈：今天的日本年轻人往往没有他们的父辈那么国际化。



The reasons for this are many, including a general lack of English proficiency. Safety concerns often come up in surveys; Japan is, after all, among the world’s most crime-free nations. Perhaps the biggest reason is rigidities in the labor market. Today’s college graduates are chasing a dwindling number of coveted lifetime-employment jobs and students begin lobbying for them in their junior year, or even their sophomore year. Fear of missing out on this recruitment process dissuades many from studying abroad or taking time off to travel before joining the ranks of the salarymen.

造成这种情况的原因很多，包括普遍缺乏英语能力。调查中经常提到安全问题；毕竟，日本是世界上犯罪率最高的国家之一。也许最大的原因是劳动力市场的僵化。如今的大学毕业生正在追逐越来越少的令人羡慕的终身就业岗位，学生们从大三甚至大二就开始游说。由于害怕错过这一招聘过程，许多人在加入工薪族行列之前都会选择出国留学或休学旅行。



The good news is that some mavericks are working to get Japan off of Galapagos, including Tadashi Yanai.

好消息是，一些特立独行的人正在努力让日本离开加拉帕戈斯，其中包括柳井忠一。



So this is what it has come to for Japan Inc.: a future in underwear instead of cars, color TVs, or industrial robots. Long before 2010, when China surpassed it to become Asia’s biggest economy and Apple unleashed the iPad, Japan fancied itself a nation fated for global primacy. Its technology was second to none, its banks dominant, its car assembly lines envied and imitated, its corporate chiefs giving Jack Welch a run for his money.

这就是日本公司的现状：未来是内衣而不是汽车、彩电或工业机器人。早在 2010 年中国超越日本成为亚洲最大经济体、苹果公司推出 iPad 之前，日本就认为自己注定要成为全球霸主。它的技术首屈一指，它的银行独占鳌头，它的汽车装配线令人羡慕和模仿，它的企业首脑让杰克-韦尔奇（Jack Welch）望尘莫及。



Deflation and political paralysis have changed that narrative in a manner that was made crystal clear in 2011, when corporate Japan was shut out of Forbes magazine’s ranking of the top 50 Asian companies. Claiming many of the spots on the list was always a matter of national pride. Japan’s economy may be weak, its leaders lacking, and the population aging, but the country sure has some amazing companies. Yet, recent Forbes lists have found plenty of room for Chinese, Filipino, Indian, Indonesian, Korean, and Thai companies, but not for Japanese brands.

通货紧缩和政治瘫痪改变了这种说法，这一点在 2011 年《福布斯》杂志的亚洲企业 50 强排名中表现得淋漓尽致。在该榜单中占据多个席位一直是日本的民族自豪感。日本可能经济疲软、领导人缺乏、人口老龄化，但这个国家确实有一些了不起的公司。然而，在最近的福布斯榜单中，中国、菲律宾、印度、印尼、韩国和泰国的公司都榜上有名，但日本品牌却榜上无名。



Rather than despairing, Japan ought to look beyond the aging industrial mainstays to learn how to thrive in a dynamic world economy: I offer up Yanai’s Uniqlo brand. The graybeards who control Japan Inc. have been slow to embrace Fast Retailing Co.’s expanding brand, or to recognize what they might learn from it. Japan liked being a technology powerhouse, not a bargain clothier that relies on cheap Chinese labor. Yet Japan can use all the fresh thinking it can muster these days and, financially, the end justifies the means. On another list, Forbes ranks Fast Retailing’s president Yanai as Japan’s richest man.

日本不应绝望，而应超越老化的工业支柱，学习如何在充满活力的世界经济中茁壮成长：我推荐柳井正的优衣库品牌。控制日本公司的灰头土脸们对快速零售公司（Fast Retailing Co.日本喜欢成为科技强国，而不是依赖中国廉价劳动力的廉价服装制造商。然而，日本现在可以利用一切新思维，而且从经济角度看，这样做的目的也是合理的。在另一份榜单上，福布斯将 Fast Retailing 总裁柳井列为日本首富。



The lessons to draw from Yanai and Uniqlo are obvious. The markets of the future are outside Japan, and the provincialism that rules Japanese management perpetuates the forces of deflation. To avoid the “Galapagos syndrome,” Yanai is opening 200 to 300 new stores worldwide each year. Japanese have been reluctant to go big overseas since their chastening in the late 1980s. That foray was an exercise driven by hubris. Buying Rockefeller Center and the Pebble Beach golf course had more to do with bragging rights than rational investing. Company presidents didn’t bid on every Van Gogh, Picasso, and Monet up for auction to make money. It was to celebrate new wealth. This time, venturing abroad will take on more strategic significance.

从柳井正和优衣库身上汲取的教训显而易见。未来的市场在日本以外，而日本管理部门的地方主义使通货紧缩长期存在。为了避免 "加拉帕戈斯综合症"，柳井正每年在全球开设 200 到 300 家新店。自 20 世纪 80 年代末日本受到挫折以来，日本人一直不愿在海外大展拳脚。那是一次狂妄自大的尝试。购买洛克菲勒中心和圆石滩高尔夫球场更多是为了炫耀，而非理性投资。公司总裁竞拍每一幅梵高、毕加索和莫奈的作品，并不是为了赚钱。而是为了庆祝新财富的诞生。这一次，走出国门将更具战略意义。





There are other things Yanai’s peers can learn from Uniqlo. One is the need to think big and out of the proverbial box. Few are his equal at framing the debate about what ails Japan. When I chat with Japanese executives about Uniqlo, many are dismissive. Responses are often some variation of “It’s a Japanese version of Gap Inc., not so impressive.” Or Uniqlo represents a race to the economic bottom, while Japan needs to move steadily upmarket. Yet Yanai understands that deflation isn’t a cyclical phenomenon, but a secular one. Rather than sit around and hope consumer prices will suddenly rise and growth return, Yanai is reshaping the retailing world. Uniqlo has brought more kaizen—the process of continuous improvement—to the apparel industry than meets the eye. Its underwear that helps wick away sweat has been a godsend to those struggling through sticky summers from Tokyo to New York. Call it Japan’s underwear model of economic growth.

柳井正的同行们还可以从优衣库身上学到其他东西。其中之一就是要有大局观，跳出俗话说的框框。柳井正是日本最有影响力的企业家之一，他很少有人能与他匹敌，能够就日本的问题展开讨论。当我与日本高管谈论优衣库时，许多人都不屑一顾。他们的回答往往是 "这是日本版的 Gap 公司，没那么令人印象深刻"。或者说，优衣库代表的是一种经济底层的竞争，而日本需要稳步向高端市场发展。然而柳井正明白，通货紧缩不是一种周期性现象，而是一种长期现象。柳井正正在重塑零售世界，而不是坐等消费者价格突然上涨，经济恢复增长。优衣库为服装业带来的 "改善"（kaizen）--持续改进的过程--远远超出了人们的想象。从东京到纽约，优衣库有助于排汗的内衣一直是那些在炎热夏季挣扎的人们的福音。这就是日本的内衣经济增长模式。



The company breaks any number of hidebound Japanese traditions. Meetings are held in English, a very rare practice in Japan. Fast retailing isn’t hung up on seniority-based hiring; if you’re 26 and smart, the job can be yours. The company has few qualms about poaching talent from competitors, which can run afoul of local etiquette. It is working to increase the ratio of foreign staff and employs edgy advertising campaigns. The company seems more serious than most about corporate social responsibility. In 2011, Yanai joined hands with Nobel Peace laureate Muhammad Yunus to create a textile company in Bangladesh to help poor women gain the financial independence society often keeps beyond their reach. Yanai also was an early and generous provider of aid after Japan’s earthquake.

公司打破了许多日本传统。会议用英语进行，这在日本非常罕见。快速零售并不拘泥于论资排辈，只要你年满 26 岁、聪明伶俐，这份工作就会属于你。公司对从竞争对手那里挖角没有什么顾虑，因为这可能会违反当地的礼仪。公司正在努力提高外籍员工的比例，并开展了前卫的广告宣传活动。该公司似乎比大多数企业更重视企业社会责任。2011 年，柳井正与诺贝尔和平奖得主穆罕默德-尤努斯（Muhammad Yunus）合作，在孟加拉国创建了一家纺织公司，帮助贫困妇女获得经济独立，而社会往往将她们拒之门外。日本地震后，柳井正也很早就慷慨解囊。



All isn’t perfect with Uniqlo, of course. There’s always a risk it will overexpand in this chaotic global environment. And the company’s fortunes are disproportionately linked to the charismatic and hands-on Yanai. If he bowed out tomorrow, it’s not clear where Uniqlo would be. Yet here is an example of how Japan—amid deflation, natural disasters, and a shrinking population—can stoke growth and change the landscape in global markets. The world needs more of it from a country that once thought being on top was its destiny.

当然，优衣库并非十全十美。在混乱的全球环境中，优衣库总有过度扩张的风险。公司的命运与魅力十足、亲力亲为的柳井正有着极大的关系。如果柳井正明天卸任，优衣库将何去何从还不得而知。然而，日本在通货紧缩、自然灾害和人口减少的情况下，仍能刺激经济增长，改变全球市场的格局。世界需要更多这样的例子，而这个国家曾一度认为登顶是它的宿命。



“We shouldn’t depend upon technological advancements in one narrow sector of the economy, such as manufacturing, to single-handedly drive growth, which is a mistake Japan has made for way too long,” Fink of Europacifica said. “Structurally, productivity growth is the greatest driver of output growth.” In other words, Japan needs to allocate more capital and energy to ideas and innovation, not making old-economy cars or ships. “The idea is to cut down on unproductive capital quickly, otherwise, depreciation costs start killing you and marginal product of capital declines and you have deflation.”

"我们不应该依赖制造业等某一狭窄经济部门的技术进步来单枪匹马地推动经济增长，这是日本长期以来犯下的错误，"欧洲太平洋协会的芬克说。"从结构上看，生产率增长是产出增长的最大驱动力。换句话说，日本需要将更多的资金和精力用于创意和创新，而不是制造旧经济型汽车或船舶。"我们的想法是迅速削减非生产性资本，否则，折旧费用就会开始要你的命，资本的边际产品就会下降，你就会面临通货紧缩"。



Japan’s English problem, meanwhile, deserves more attention than government officials realize. Paradoxically, Japan spares little expense boosting its economy. It has amassed the largest public debt, lowered interest rates to zero, and bailed out banks and companies like Japan Airlines Co. Now, it’s time for Japan to put its mouth where its money is.

与此同时，日本的英语问题比政府官员意识到的更值得关注。矛盾的是，日本几乎不遗余力地推动经济发展。它积累了最庞大的公共债务，将利率降至零，并救助银行和日本航空公司等公司。现在，日本应该把钱用在刀刃上了。



Tokyo wants to be a global financial center. It’s busily upgrading infrastructure and considering a similar zoning approach as London’s Canary Wharf to attract hedge funds, banks, and other institutions. While that’s all well and good, a key ingredient is missing: English. Call it the “Economics of Engrish,” as did C. H. Kwan, senior fellow at Japan’s Research Institute of Economy, Trade and Industry, in a May 2002 article. The idea was that Japan needs to improve its English proficiency to stay at the forefront of business in an increasingly globalized world.

东京希望成为全球金融中心。东京正忙于升级基础设施，并考虑采用与伦敦金丝雀码头类似的分区方法来吸引对冲基金、银行和其他机构。这一切都很好，但却缺少了一个关键要素：英语。正如日本经济产业研究所高级研究员 C. H. Kwan 在 2002 年 5 月的一篇文章中所说，这就是 "英语经济学"。他的观点是，日本需要提高英语水平，以便在日益全球化的世界中保持商业领先地位。



Fast-forward more than a decade and Japan is still tripping over what many observers call its “English-language deficit.” Considering its economic success and the frequency with which Japanese travel abroad, the country’s English-fluency rate is surprisingly low. I feel a bit uncomfortable tackling this issue. Arguing Japanese need to learn English might strike some as an attempt to advance America’s cultural hegemony. My own challenge learning Japanese after 12 years in Tokyo also makes me skittish about judging others’ language abilities. We Americans aren’t known for our passion for learning other tongues.

十多年过去了，日本仍在为许多观察家所说的 "英语赤字 "而苦恼。考虑到其经济成就和日本人出国旅游的频率，日本的英语流利率低得令人吃惊。解决这个问题让我感到有些不自在。论证日本人需要学习英语可能会让一些人觉得是在试图推进美国的文化霸权。我在东京生活了 12 年，在学习日语的过程中遇到了很多挑战，这也让我在评判他人的语言能力时有些胆怯。我们美国人并不以热衷于学习其他语言而闻名。



Yet English, for better or worse, has become the lingua franca of finance, business, science, and the Internet. The longer any nation resists the need to improve its English skills, the more it limits its potential. This argument would be valid if the global business language were French, German, Mandarin—or Japanese. Even world leaders known for acrimony toward the West, such as former Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad, grudgingly acknowledge as much.

然而，无论好坏，英语已成为金融、商业、科学和互联网的通用语言。任何国家抵制提高英语技能的时间越长，其潜力就越受限制。如果全球商业语言是法语、德语、普通话或日语，这一论点也是成立的。即使是以仇视西方著称的世界领导人，如马来西亚前总理马哈蒂尔-穆罕默德，也勉强承认这一点。



“A genuine global financial center needs to bring together players of every nationality, and from a variety of disciplines: accountants, lawyers, IT specialists, traders, due-diligence guys, etcetera,” says Louis Turner, London-based chief executive of the Asia-Pacific Technology Network. “There has to be one working language to bring all these people together and, like it or not, that language has to be English.”

"亚太科技网络（Asia-Pacific Technology Network）驻伦敦首席执行官路易斯-特纳（Louis Turner）说："一个真正的全球金融中心需要汇聚来自不同国籍、不同领域的参与者：会计师、律师、IT 专家、交易员、尽职调查人员等等。"他说："必须有一种工作语言将所有这些人汇聚在一起，不管你喜不喜欢，这种语言必须是英语。



In Asia, Mandarin may eventually establish itself as a working second language for business and science. For now, though, the focus is on English. In 2011, native-Japanese speakers taking the paper-based Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) placed among the bottom 3 out of 33 Asian nations.

在亚洲，普通话最终可能会成为商业和科学领域的第二语言。不过，目前的重点还是英语。2011 年，母语为日本语的人参加纸质版托福考试（TOEFL）的成绩在 33 个亚洲国家中排名倒数第三。



Japan is beginning to move in the right direction. The education ministry introduced measures in recent years to improve its language program and encouraged public school teachers to undergo fresh training. Abe wants to compel students to begin English classes much earlier and with greater fluency. That would help repair some of the damage Abe’s government did to Japan’s language programs during his first stint as prime minister from 2006 to 2007. Abe’s education minister, Bunmei Ibuki, shifted the focus back to teaching traditional values and patriotism to young Japanese. It was an untimely distraction in tackling what’s arguably a curriculum problem. The emphasis has long been on passing written English exams, not verbal communication. Japan’s mistake has been to view English as a curriculum subject, not as a tool for greater competitiveness.

日本正开始朝着正确的方向迈进。近年来，教育部推出了改进语言课程的措施，并鼓励公立学校教师接受新的培训。安倍晋三希望迫使学生更早、更流利地开始学习英语。这将有助于弥补安倍政府在 2006 年至 2007 年首次担任首相期间对日本语言项目造成的一些损害。安倍晋三的教育大臣伊吹文明（Bunmei Ibuki）将重点转回到向日本年轻人传授传统价值观和爱国主义。在解决可以说是课程问题的问题上，这是一个不合时宜的分心。长期以来，日本一直强调通过书面英语考试，而不是口头交流。日本的错误在于将英语视为一门课程，而不是提高竞争力的工具。



Japan’s English challenge becomes downright farcical at times. In June 2013, Finance Minister Taro Aso prompted considerable eye-rolling when he suggested corporate Japan’s poor language skills are actually an asset. Japan escaped the worst of the 2008 financial meltdown, Aso claimed, because its bankers were mystified by subprime loans: “Managers of Japanese banks hardly understood English, that’s why they didn’t buy.”

日本面临的英语挑战有时简直就是一场闹剧。2013 年 6 月，日本财务大臣麻生太郎提出，日本企业糟糕的语言技能实际上是一种资产，这引起了人们的极大反感。麻生称，日本之所以能躲过 2008 年最严重的金融风暴，是因为日本的银行家们对次级贷款感到困惑："日本银行的经理们几乎不懂英语，这就是他们不买账的原因。



The English issue is becoming a serious liability. It was moot in the 1980s, when foreigners lined up to do business with a Japan very much on the ascendancy. Today, Japanese companies compete more with international executives, often boasting better communication skills, than with domestic rivals. All this can lead to heavy costs for corporations. Teaching English to employees is an expensive, productivity-killing process. It also can lead to faulty decisions. Hiring someone primarily for his or her language skills may mean missing out on a far more skilled candidate. The language debate has met with some resistance in Japan. It’s at the core of concerns about globalization watering down culture and tradition. Japanese is an incredibly complex language with thousands of characters, layers of honorifics to master, and a proud literary history. Many worry a greater emphasis on English will devalue Japanese skills in future generations. A happy medium must be struck here. Embracing English need not come at the expense of tradition or culture. The stark reality is that the rise of China and India is making this debate moot. It’s leaving Japan with a choice: Either improve English proficiency, or get left behind by fast-growing economic upstarts.

英语问题正在成为一个严重的问题。在 20 世纪 80 年代，当外国人排队与日本做生意时，这个问题是没有实际意义的。如今，日本公司与国际高管的竞争比与国内竞争对手的竞争更加激烈，而国际高管往往拥有更好的沟通技巧。所有这一切都会导致企业付出沉重的代价。向员工教授英语是一个昂贵的、扼杀生产力的过程。它还可能导致错误的决策。主要因为语言技能而聘用某人，可能意味着错失一个技能更高超的候选人。在日本，语言辩论遇到了一些阻力。这是全球化淡化文化和传统的核心问题。日语是一门极其复杂的语言，有成千上万的汉字，需要掌握层层叠叠的敬语，还有引以为豪的文学史。许多人担心，更加强调英语会贬低后代的日语技能。这里必须找到一个平衡点。拥抱英语不一定要以牺牲传统或文化为代价。严峻的现实是，中国和印度的崛起正在使这场辩论失去意义。这让日本不得不做出选择：要么提高英语水平，要么被快速发展的经济后起之秀甩在身后。



“It would definitely help to brand Japan and rebrand the country,” said Martin Roll, chief executive officer of Singapore-based consulting firm VentureRepublic and an expert on branding.

"新加坡咨询公司 VentureRepublic 首席执行官、品牌专家马丁-罗尔（Martin Roll）说："这肯定有助于日本的品牌建设和国家品牌重塑。



Generally, people find Japan a very nice place to visit and Japanese very friendly. I actually think people’s general English proficiency has increased in the last 10 years, but there is still lots to be done. People’s English proficiency will help brand a country due to the enhanced perception of a country by visiting tourists and business people who find it easier, more seamless, and more approachable if they can navigate/communicate with ease. It would be perceived easier by businesspeople, other governments, and associations of all sorts to conduct business/activities with Japan, and will help the impression of professionalism, international perspectives, and similar issues, if the English proficiency is higher. On the internal aspects, so will an enhanced English proficiency encourage/motivate especially younger generations to interact and embrace the global world, as they would feel more confident visiting other countries, study internationally, interact with foreigners, and connect themselves on a larger scale than today with the global world.

一般来说，人们认为日本是一个非常适合旅游的地方，日本人也非常友好。实际上，我认为在过去 10 年里，人们的英语水平普遍有所提高，但仍有许多工作要做。人们的英语熟练程度将有助于一个国家的品牌建设，因为来访的游客和商务人士会对这个国家有更深刻的印象，如果他们能够轻松地浏览/交流，他们会觉得这个国家更容易、更无缝、更平易近人。如果英语熟练程度较高，商务人士、其他国家政府和各类协会会更容易与日本开展业务/活动，并有助于加深对专业性、国际视野和类似问题的印象。就内部而言，英语水平的提高也将鼓励/激励年轻一代，尤其是年轻一代与全球世界进行互动和拥抱全球世界，因为他们会比今天更自信地访问其他国家、在国际上学习、与外国人互动，并在更大范围内将自己与全球世界联系起来。





Singapore’s example is instructive, Roll said. Its population is predominantly Chinese, but the government policy spanning back from the 1970s made English the norm throughout the government and society. It was among the signature achievements of Lee Kuan Yew, the nation’s founding father and former prime minister. Singapore’s level of English proficiency helped Singapore connect into the fiber of global business and today it’s a key Asian financial center.

罗尔说，新加坡的例子很有启发性。新加坡人口以华人为主，但自 20 世纪 70 年代以来，政府的政策使英语成为整个政府和社会的规范。这是新加坡开国元勋、前总理李光耀的标志性成就之一。新加坡的英语熟练程度帮助新加坡与全球商业接轨，如今它已成为亚洲重要的金融中心。



“The Japanese government would therefore contribute lots to the future of Japan and its people by enhancing the usage and proficiency of English across all platforms in schools, universities, and government,” Roll said.

"因此，日本政府将通过在学校、大学和政府的所有平台上提高英语的使用和熟练程度，为日本和日本人民的未来做出巨大贡献，"罗尔说。



English isn’t everything, though. It’s not a magic wand that will suddenly rid Japan of its long-term problems. Something even deeper is at play, something Robert Dujarric, director of the Institute of Contemporary Asian Studies at Temple University’s Tokyo campus, calls Japan’s deglobalization. “Around the world, students at the best universities are experiencing a more international upbringing than their parents,” Dujarric said. “Japan, however, stands apart because of its continued seclusion. In particular, the decline of the number of Japanese students at leading U.S. institutions is startling.”

不过，英语并不是万能的。英语并不是能让日本突然摆脱长期问题的魔杖。天普大学东京校区当代亚洲研究所所长罗伯特-杜贾里克（Robert Dujarric）称之为日本的 "去全球化"（deglobalization）。"Dujarric说："在世界各地，最好大学的学生比他们的父母经历了更国际化的教育。"然而，日本却因其持续的封闭性而与众不同。特别是，在美国一流大学就读的日本学生人数的减少令人吃惊。



The findings of Dujarric’s research with Shin Woon, an economics student at Barnard College at New York’s Columbia University, in 2013 are startling indeed. Between 1998 and 1999, 705 Japanese students were enrolled at the three top U.S. universities they analyzed: Columbia, Harvard College, and Massachusetts Institute of Technology. But by the 2011 to 2012 period, that number had fallen to 339. More broadly, enrollment over the preceding seven years also dropped markedly at Yale University and University of California–Berkeley. Overall there were just 19,966 Japanese studying in the United States between 2011 and 2012 compared with 46,872 between 2000 and 2001. Dujarric and Woon went even deeper, looking at doctoral candidates in several renowned, mostly U.S.-based English-speaking universities with an emphasis on business, economics, and science—disciplines where moderately proficient English speakers can excel. Out of all Northeast Asians enrolled, Japanese accounted for less than 10 percent. And of the 1,306 faculty members, 6 were Japanese, whereas more than 60 were from Northeast Asia. While some of the decline in Japanese studying in the United States reflected some students enrolling in other nations, the basic direction is abundantly clear: Overall Japanese participation in international education is declining dramatically. That’s an ominous trend on several levels.

2013 年，杜贾里克与纽约哥伦比亚大学巴纳德学院经济学学生申文（Shin Woon）的研究结果确实令人震惊。1998 年至 1999 年间，705 名日本学生进入他们分析的三所美国顶尖大学学习：哥伦比亚大学、哈佛学院和麻省理工学院。但到了2011至2012年间，这一数字下降到339人。更广泛地说，耶鲁大学和加州大学伯克利分校在过去七年中的招生人数也明显下降。2011年至2012年期间，在美国学习的日本人总体上只有19966人，而2000年至2001年期间则有46872人。杜贾里克和温更深入地研究了几所著名英语大学的博士生，这些大学大多位于美国，重点研究商业、经济和科学--这些英语中等水平的人可以在这些学科中大显身手。在所有入学的东北亚人中，日本人不到 10%。在 1306 名教职员工中，日本人只有 6 名，而来自东北亚地区的教职员工则有 60 多名。虽然在美国学习的日本人的减少在一定程度上反映了一些学生在其他国家入学，但基本方向是非常明确的：日本人参与国际教育的总体情况正在急剧下降。从多个层面来看，这是一个不祥的趋势。



“First, Japan’s national security requires Japanese who can interact with the rest of the world,” Dujarric and Woon argued.

"首先，日本的国家安全需要能够与世界其他国家互动的日本人，"Dujarric 和 Woon 认为。



It suffers from a paucity of officials, politicians, journalists, and public experts who can engage foreigners. Its national security apparatus is woefully short of men and women who can participate in international meetings, negotiate with foes, work with allies, and understand the outside world. The situation will worsen. Second, the country is not producing enough internationalized Japanese when corporate Japan is embarking on a new wave of expansion, fueled by a falling demographic at home, increasing costs of production, temporarily lowered by “Abenomics” but nevertheless high, and growing opportunities overseas. But unlike Korea, Japan lacks the internationally minded young men and women who are best suited for these tasks. And third, Japanese academia needs to integrate with the rest of the world, starting with Japanese studying and teaching abroad. As other countries engage in “brain circulation,” Japanese schools are stagnating because of their isolation. This happened in the Edo period (1603–1868), when the lack of sufficient intercourse with the outside world led to Japan falling behind in every area of science, technology, and administrative efficiency.

美国缺少能与外国人打交道的官员、政治家、记者和公共专家。其国家安全机构也严重缺乏能够参加国际会议、与敌人谈判、与盟友合作以及了解外部世界的人员。这种情况将进一步恶化。其次，日本企业正在掀起新一轮的扩张浪潮，国内人口减少，生产成本不断增加（虽然 "安倍经济学 "暂时降低了成本，但仍居高不下），海外机会不断增多，这些因素都推动了日本的发展，但日本却没有培养出足够的国际化日本人。但与韩国不同的是，日本缺乏最适合从事这些工作的具有国际视野的年轻人。第三，日本学术界需要与世界其他国家融合，首先要从在国外学习和教学的日本人开始。当其他国家都在进行 "人才循环 "时，日本的学校却因与世隔绝而停滞不前。这种情况发生在江户时代（1603-1868 年），当时由于缺乏与外部世界的充分交流，日本在科学、技术和行政效率等各个领域都落后于其他国家。





Will Japan change? Dujarric and Woon aren’t optimistic, even as Abe’s team urges greater globalization on the part of young Japanese. One problem is the rising cost of tuition, a burden exacerbated by Abe’s efforts to weaken the yen. Runaway university tuition in the United States has been climbing into the stratosphere and acts as a barrier to Japanese. But it’s far from the whole story, considering the increased numbers of students from much poorer nations flocking to the United States, even with the arduous visa process. While some of these students receive government assistance or scholarships, many pay their own way. In other words, students committed to studying in America tend to find a way to fulfill those goals.

日本会改变吗？杜加里克和温并不乐观，即使安倍团队敦促日本年轻人加强全球化。问题之一是学费不断上涨，安倍晋三为削弱日元所做的努力加剧了这一负担。美国大学学费飞涨，对日本人来说是个障碍。但这还远远不是问题的全部，因为越来越多来自贫穷得多的国家的学生涌入美国，即使签证程序十分繁琐。虽然其中一些学生获得了政府补助或奖学金，但许多学生都是自费留学。换句话说，致力于在美国学习的学生往往会找到实现这些目标的途径。



What’s more, surveys indicate that young company employees in Japan are increasingly more reluctant to work overseas than, say, their fathers’ generation. Japanese diplomats, for example, often bemoan the unwillingness of new recruits at government ministries to be posted abroad. That reluctance will increasingly hold Japan back in the international arena.

此外，调查显示，与父辈相比，日本公司的年轻雇员越来越不愿意到海外工作。例如，日本外交官经常抱怨政府部门的新员工不愿被派往海外工作。这种不情愿将越来越多地阻碍日本在国际舞台上的发展。



“With some exceptions in the natural sciences, Japan’s universities play in the national leagues, not in the Olympics,” Dujarric and Woon said.

"Dujarric和Woon说："除了自然科学领域的一些例外，日本的大学参加的是全国联赛，而不是奥运会。



This is not due to a lack of intellectual firepower, but is a result of the evolution of Japanese tertiary education since the nineteenth century. For elite Japanese schools, a globalized Japan would be like bringing in a T-Rex to roam free in their erstwhile-protected enclosure. Good students and the best faculty would leave and globally oriented funding would flow elsewhere. Also, the elite will suffer because their power comes from their Japanese credentials—education, experience, recognition, connections, etc. . . . Globalization would make status far more dependent on international social and educational capital. Thus those whose capital is solely Japanese would see their assets trade at a discount. This explains why many Japanese feel that spending too much time overseas will be detrimental to their career prospects, as they will miss out in the race to acquire Japanese credentials.

这并不是因为缺乏智力火力，而是十九世纪以来日本高等教育演变的结果。对于日本名校来说，全球化的日本就像引进了一只霸王龙，让它在昔日受到保护的围墙内自由驰骋。优秀学生和最优秀的教师会离开，面向全球的资金会流向别处。此外，精英阶层也会受到影响，因为他们的权力来自于他们在日本的证书--教育、经验、认可、关系等......。全球化将使地位更加依赖于国际社会和教育资本。因此，那些仅拥有日本资本的人将会看到他们的资产以折扣价进行交易。这就解释了为什么许多日本人认为，在海外花费过多时间将不利于他们的职业前景，因为他们将在获取日本证书的竞争中失利。





Here, too, there’s even a role for gender. In the globalized workplace, Japanese women often outperform men. Japanese females outnumber men both at the United Nations and as a percentage of managerial roles at foreign-owned businesses. All this means is that the internationalization of the economy will benefit women most. The paradox, of course, is that Japan is a nation run by conservative men who tend to think women belong in supporting roles. These incentives inherent to this arrangement argue against greater Japanese globalization.

在这里，性别也发挥着作用。在全球化的职场中，日本女性的表现往往优于男性。无论是在联合国，还是在外资企业担任管理职务的比例上，日本女性都超过了男性。这一切都意味着，经济的国际化将使女性受益最大。当然，矛盾的是，日本是一个由保守的男性管理的国家，他们倾向于认为女性属于配角。这种安排所固有的激励机制不利于日本进一步实现全球化。



Is there even a Japan psyche angle worth mentioning here? “An internationalized Japan would delegitimize the idea of the archipelago as a unique harmonious, homogeneous, and ‘Japanese’ homeland and open the door to a more liberal society with different values and new elites. This runs contrary to Prime Minster Shinzo Abe’s cabinet’s emphasis on Japanese values and history,” Dujarric and Woon argued.

这里还有值得一提的日本心理角度吗？"一个国际化的日本将使群岛作为一个独特的和谐、同质和'日本'家园的理念失去合法性，并为一个拥有不同价值观和新精英的更加自由的社会敞开大门。这与首相安倍晋三内阁对日本价值观和历史的强调背道而驰。



This deglobalization is decidedly at odds not just with the direction of the world economy but at key turning points in Japan’s history. When the Tokugawa Shogunate gave way to the Meiji period in 1868, the Japanese embraced ideas from abroad with voracious enthusiasm as the country began its march toward industrialization. “Today, those who decide Japan’s destiny benefit from a system that is much stronger than that of the Tokugawas,” Dujarric and Woon concluded. “The institutions that define the country are old and powerful. Those who rise to the top of this system are rarely revolutionaries, but mostly diligent functionaries who fear reform.”

这种非全球化不仅与世界经济的发展方向相悖，也与日本历史的关键转折点相悖。1868 年，当德川幕府让位于明治时期时，日本人以贪婪的热情接受了来自国外的思想，开始向工业化迈进。"杜加里克和温总结道："今天，那些决定日本命运的人受益于一个比德川时代强大得多的制度。"定义这个国家的体制古老而强大。在这一体制中崛起的人很少是革命者，而大多是惧怕改革的勤勉的官僚。





Fast Retailing isn’t alone in compelling employees to speak English. Tire giant Bridgestone and Honda Motor Co. are joining a small group of companies using language to declare their global ambitions. The same goes for e-commerce giant Rakuten Inc., whose president, Hiroshi Mikitani, is on a personal mission to get Japan off Galapagos.

迫使员工讲英语的公司不止 Fast Retailing 一家。轮胎巨头普利司通（Bridgestone）和本田汽车公司（Honda Motor Co.电子商务巨头乐天公司（Rakuten Inc.



In mid-2011, Mikitani caused shockwaves when he left the main business lobby, Nippon Keidanren, and started a rival association. He’s fighting to make corporate Japan nimbler and more entrepreneurial by creating space where long-neglected small-to-midsize companies can brainstorm and make policy recommendations that are getting Abe’s attention (the prime minister met with the group in April 2013). Mikitani loudly condemns Japan’s insularity and favors letting the creative destruction emphasized by economist Joseph Schumpeter play out.

2011 年年中，Mikitani 离开了主要的商业游说团体日本经济团体联合会（Nippon Keidanren），成立了一个与之对立的协会，引起了震动。他致力于让日本企业变得更灵活、更有创业精神，为长期被忽视的中小型企业提供集思广益的空间，并提出政策建议，这引起了安倍晋三的注意（2013 年 4 月首相会见了该组织）。Mikitani 强烈谴责日本的封闭性，主张让经济学家约瑟夫-熊彼特（Joseph Schumpeter）所强调的创造性破坏发挥作用。



That also goes for SoftBank Corp. president Masayoshi Son, who is defying the powerful nuclear lobby by investing $196 million in renewable-energy projects and promoting an Asia-wide “supergrid” to link cities from Mumbai to Tokyo. His $21.6 billion bid for U.S. mobile giant Sprint Nextel Corp. in 2013 also marked a bold foray overseas.

软银公司（SoftBank Corp. ）总裁孙正义（Masayoshi Son）也是如此，他不畏强大的核游说集团，投资1.96亿美元用于可再生能源项目，并推动全亚洲的 "超级电网"，将孟买到东京的城市连接起来。2013 年，他斥资 216 亿美元收购了美国移动巨头 Sprint Nextel 公司，这也标志着他大胆地进军海外市场。



In October, Japan was treated to the juicy spectacle of two of its richest and most innovative entrepreneurs brawling in public over Internet market share and visions for the future. But what’s most important about the fight between Son and Mikitani is the example it sets.

今年 10 月，日本两位最富有、最具创新精神的企业家为争夺互联网市场份额和未来愿景而大打出手，场面十分壮观。但孙正义和三木谷之战最重要的是树立了一个榜样。



The two men have much in common. They are self-made billionaires who founded game-changing technology companies—Son with mobile-phone carrier SoftBank, Mikitani with Japan’s answer to Amazon.com. Each is his company’s largest shareholder, fully fluent in English (a rarity in corporate Japan), and U.S.-educated (Son at the University of California–Berkeley; Mikitani at Harvard University). Both are married with two kids. Both make splashy investments in overseas Internet companies (Son in Alibaba Group Holding Ltd.; Mikitani in Pinterest Inc.). Both are sports nuts who own baseball teams.

两人有很多共同之处。他们都是白手起家的亿万富翁，创办了改变游戏规则的科技公司--孙正义创办了移动电话运营商软银公司（SoftBank），三木谷则创办了日本的亚马逊公司（Amazon.com）。他们都是自己公司的最大股东，英语流利（这在日本企业界非常罕见），都在美国接受过教育（Son 在加州大学伯克利分校学习，Mikitani 在哈佛大学学习）。两人都已婚，有两个孩子。两人都对海外互联网公司进行了大手笔投资（Son 投资于阿里巴巴集团；Mikitani 投资于 Pinterest 公司）。两人都是拥有棒球队的体育狂人。



Son and Mikitani are also the faces of New Japan and unapologetic critics of Japan Inc.’s clubby, insular ways. They oppose nuclear power, a stance that puts them in direct conflict with the ruling Liberal Democratic Party and Japan’s powerful business lobby, Nippon Keidanren. Above all, both share a passion for change and are the kind of creature Japan needs more of as it tries to end a 20-year funk. As they mix it up and make headlines around the globe, they are adding some much-needed energy to Abe’s revival plans.

孙正义和三木谷也是 "新日本 "的代言人，他们毫不讳言地批评日本公司的俱乐部化和孤僻方式。他们反对核能，这一立场使他们与执政党自民党和日本强大的商业游说团体日本经济团体联合会（Nippon Keidanren）直接冲突。最重要的是，两人都热衷于变革，是日本在努力结束长达 20 年的低迷时所需的人才。当他们混在一起并成为全球头条新闻时，他们为安倍的复兴计划增添了一些急需的能量。



Their latest tiff was instigated by Son, who is also chairman of Yahoo Japan Corp. Son eliminated fees that the search and shopping business had charged for online stores, a direct challenge to Rakuten, Japan’s largest Internet shopping mall. Rakuten’s model is based on charging businesses such fees to operate shops on its site; by contrast, Yahoo Japan is a portal and retail site that gets more than half its revenue from advertising. Son figures lower fees will increase market share and, eventually, ad sales.

雅虎日本公司董事长孙正义挑起了两家公司最近的争执。孙正义取消了搜索和购物业务对网上商店收取的费用，这是对日本最大的互联网购物商城乐天的直接挑战。乐天的模式是向在其网站上经营商店的企业收取费用；相比之下，雅虎日本是一家门户和零售网站，一半以上的收入来自广告。Son 认为，降低收费将增加市场份额，最终提高广告销售额。



Japan’s conservative business culture is somewhat aghast by the budding price war: At one point, investors had wiped out as much as $4.3 billion in both companies’ market values. Japan Inc. has always encouraged firms carving up territory and staying out of each other’s way. When rifts emerge, they’re handled over whiskey and secret handshakes. How could Japan’s second- and third-wealthiest men scuffle publicly like this? The indignity!

日本保守的商业文化对这场萌芽中的价格战感到有些震惊：投资者一度将两家公司高达 43 亿美元的市值一扫而空。日本公司一直鼓励企业开疆拓土，互不干涉。一旦出现裂痕，就通过威士忌和秘密握手来解决。日本第二大和第三大富豪怎么能这样公开争吵呢？耻辱



But Son and Mikitani are showing young, would-be entrepreneurs that they can be more than docile, corporate drones in dark suits mindlessly working their way toward retirement. They are injecting competitive juices into an economy that’s known all too little. They are, by example, inspiring contemporaries to take risks, think globally, and act in the best interests of shareholders.

但是，孙正义和 Mikitani 正在向年轻的准企业家们展示，他们不仅仅是温顺的、穿着深色西装的公司无人驾驶飞机，而是可以无意识地为退休而工作。他们正在为这个知之甚少的经济体注入竞争活力。他们以身作则，激励着同时代的人们敢于冒险，放眼全球，为股东的最佳利益而行动。



Theirs isn’t the perfect rivalry. A better one would pit New Japan against the old guard. The last time that happened in a widely publicized way it didn’t end well for Internet guru Takafumi Horie of Livedoor Co. In 2007, the then-35-year-old Horie, an outsider in corporate Japan, was locked up for accounting irregularities, though his real crime seemed to be speaking out against Japan Inc.’s blinkered ways.

他们并不是完美的对手。更好的对决应该是新日本与守旧派的对决。上一次以大肆宣传的方式发生这种情况时，Livedoor 公司的互联网大师堀江隆文（Takafumi Horie）的下场并不好。 2007 年，当时 35 岁的堀江是日本企业界的局外人，他因会计违规而被关了起来，尽管他真正的罪行似乎是公开反对日本公司的盲目做法。



Contrast his fate with that of Kikukawa, on whose watch a $1.7 billion fraud at Olympus resulted in an 80 percent plunge in market value and global shame. The scrappy, brash, T-shirt-wearing Horie went to prison for engaging in practices that are widely employed in Japan accounting circles. And Kikukawa, as Japan Inc. as an executive can be, got to go home—a suspended sentence.

他的命运与菊川的命运形成了鲜明对比，奥林巴斯公司 17 亿美元的欺诈案导致该公司市值暴跌 80%，全球蒙羞。这位穿着 T 恤、邋遢、粗鲁的堀江先生因为采用了日本会计界普遍采用的做法而锒铛入狱。而作为日本公司的高管，菊川则被判缓刑回家。



Still, there’s great value in having the two faces of Japan’s new guard locking horns. More fights like this would have executives looking over their shoulders, unable to hide behind the cross-shareholding arrangements that kill competition, the poison pills that breed complacency, and the insularity that stifles rapid growth.

不过，让日本新卫队的两张面孔针锋相对还是很有价值的。更多这样的较量会让高管们瞠目结舌，无法再躲在扼杀竞争的交叉持股安排、滋生自满情绪的毒丸和扼杀快速增长的孤立主义背后。



Does Abenomics deserve some credit for this Son–Mikitani spat? I would argue the opposite. Sure, their businesses are benefiting from the first two phases of Abe’s revival plan: monetary and fiscal pump-priming. But these innovators are taking phase three—shaking up Japan’s staid business culture—into their own hands. Abe would be wise to respond to their impatience by getting on with deregulating the economy.

安倍经济学是否应为此次宋-三谷之争立下汗马功劳？我的看法恰恰相反。当然，他们的企业受益于安倍晋三复兴计划的前两个阶段：货币和财政刺激。但是，这些创新者们正在将第三阶段--打破日本僵化的商业文化--掌握在自己手中。对于他们的急躁情绪，安倍晋三明智的做法是继续放松对经济的管制。



For all their differences, Mikitani and Son personify the kind of visionary and unconventional leadership Abe hopes to inspire. Mikitani wants to be the world’s next Jeff Bezos, the Amazon.com founder who is now rescuing the Washington Post. Son, meanwhile, is expanding globally with his acquisition of U.S. wireless provider Sprint Corp. As these two titans face off and roil the claustrophobic confines of Japanese society and business, they’re giving Abenomics just the boost it needs.

尽管存在种种差异，但 Mikitani 和 Son 都是安倍晋三希望激励的那种富有远见、不拘一格的领导者的化身。三木谷希望成为世界上的下一个杰夫-贝索斯（Jeff Bezos），他是亚马逊网站的创始人，目前正在拯救《华盛顿邮报》。与此同时，孙正义正通过收购美国无线服务提供商斯普林特公司（Sprint Corp.这两位巨头的对决搅动了日本社会和商业的幽闭空间，也为安倍经济学提供了所需的动力。



There’s no shortage of pundits eager to tell Abe how to shake up Japan’s economy. Instead of looking to academics for advice, though, the prime minister should get into the trenches with some of the nation’s more unconventional corporate heads. Even so, enough top executives have successfully challenged the status quo for Abe to take note. They have proven how much change is possible, even within the claustrophobic constraints of Japanese society and business. Abe should absorb the lesson.

急于告诉安倍如何撼动日本经济的学者不乏其人。不过，与其向学者们寻求建议，首相倒不如与国内一些更不按常理出牌的企业首脑们打成一片。即便如此，已经有足够多的企业高管成功挑战了现状，安倍晋三应该注意到这一点。他们已经证明，即使在日本社会和商业的幽闭限制下，变革也是可能的。安倍应该吸取教训。



Yet the appeal of argumentativeness can have its limits in a nation that favors harmony. That’s particularly true of politics, as Osaka Mayor Toru Hashimoto learned the hard way. The words “future prime minister” routinely accompany discussions of Hashimoto’s rapid rise. At 44, he’s young and telegenic in a nation where 26 percent of the population is over 65 and the other best-known regional leader, former Tokyo Governor Shintaro Ishihara, is 81. Hashimoto is unusually blunt in his criticism of national leaders, and his vision is often at odds with the prevailing wisdom in Tokyo. Some have even gone so far as to call the brash Hashimoto Japan’s answer to Adolf Hitler. Certainly not the majority of the 2.7 million people in the western Japanese city. Many Osakans love their mayor’s crusade against Tokyo’s dysfunction and absolute power over the country. It has Japan’s old guard running scared and comparing Hashimoto to Europe’s most notorious genocidal fascist.

然而，在一个崇尚和谐的国家里，争论的魅力也有其局限性。这一点在政治领域尤为明显，大阪市长桥本彻就深有体会。在讨论桥本彻的迅速崛起时，"未来首相 "的字眼总是不绝于耳。在这个人口中有 26% 超过 65 岁、另一位最知名的地区领导人、前东京都知事石原慎太郎已经 81 岁的国家，44 岁的桥本年轻有为。桥本对国家领导人的批评异常直率，他的观点经常与东京的主流观点相左。有些人甚至把粗鲁的桥本称为日本的阿道夫-希特勒。当然，在这座日本西部城市的 270 万居民中，大多数人并不这么认为。许多大阪人喜欢他们的市长对东京功能失调和国家绝对权力的讨伐。这让日本的守旧派惶恐不安，并将桥本比作欧洲最臭名昭著的种族灭绝法西斯。



If the world needs anything, it’s a moratorium on Hitler analogies. As much as one may dislike Barack Obama or George W. Bush, neither bears even the most fleeting resemblance to the maniacal German leader. Suggestions to the contrary are beyond ignorance and vandalize history. Yet for Japanese to turn to a man in this rarefied company speaks volumes about where Japan finds itself in a volatile global environment.

如果说世界需要什么，那就是暂停对希特勒的类比。尽管人们可能不喜欢巴拉克-奥巴马或小布什，但他们都与这位疯狂的德国领导人没有哪怕一丁点相似之处。与此相反的建议是对历史的无知和亵渎。然而，日本人求助于一个如此罕见的人，这充分说明了日本在动荡的全球环境中的处境。



The desire for change reached a fever pitch after the 2011 earthquake and tsunami. Even before the earth shook, the waters rose, and radiation leaked on March 11, 2011, Japanese sensed Tokyo had lost its way. Many just hadn’t realized how much. Hence the Tea Party–like dynamic inherent in Hashimoto’s popularity. His drive for greater accountability, decentralized decision making, and fresh ideas is as well-timed as it is frightening to the establishment.

2011 年地震和海啸发生后，人们对变革的渴望达到了顶峰。即使在 2011 年 3 月 11 日发生地震、海水上涨和辐射泄漏之前，日本人就已经感觉到东京已经迷失了方向。只是很多人还没有意识到这一点。因此，桥本的受欢迎程度与茶党有异曲同工之妙。他要求加强问责制、下放决策权和提出新想法，这对建制派来说既适时又可怕。



Frankly, I find some of Hashimoto’s platform borderline creepy. His party’s training program for aspiring leaders, the Restoration Politics Institute, smacks of nationalism. His inquisition against teachers who refuse to stand and sing when the national anthem is played—some worry it celebrates Japan’s militaristic past—is right-wing silliness. Giving the third degree to city workers with tattoos is just weird. Yes, Japanese traditionally associate body art with members of yakuza organized-crime groups. But in 2013, is it anyone’s business if some desk clerk inked Mickey Mouse on his back?

坦率地说，我发现桥本的一些政纲令人毛骨悚然。他的政党为有抱负的领导人提供的培训计划--"复兴政治研究所"（Restoration Politics Institute）--充满了民族主义的味道。他对在奏国歌时拒绝起立唱歌的教师进行审问--有人担心这是在歌颂日本军国主义的过去--是右翼的愚蠢之举。对有纹身的城市工人施以三等处分也很奇怪。没错，日本人传统上将人体艺术与黑社会犯罪组织成员联系在一起。但在 2013 年，如果某个服务员在背上纹上米老鼠，这与任何人有关系吗？



Yet at a time when Japanese are grasping for change, Hashimoto is what passes for a breath of fresh air. Take his stance against relying on nuclear power, one that enraged the national government. Hashimoto is doing what any elected leader should: heeding the will of the people. The large majority of Japan’s 127 million people no longer trust power companies and bureaucrats to protect them from another Chernobyl.

然而，在日本人渴求变革的时候，桥本却是一股清流。就拿他反对依赖核能的立场来说，这曾激怒了日本政府。桥本正在做任何民选领导人都应该做的事：顺应民意。日本 1.27 亿人口中的绝大多数人不再相信电力公司和官僚会保护他们免受另一场切尔诺贝利事故的影响。



All Abe’s LDP has done is remind voters that the nuclear industry holds the puppet strings even after the Fukushima disaster. Hashimoto is fighting for people, not companies, and good for him. This gives us a sense of how dangerous divergent views are to vested interests in Tokyo—and why Japan needs more of them. Hashimoto’s calls for greater accountability and competition are particularly welcome. His Japan Restoration Party favors direct elections for prime minister, which would be a genuine revolution in Japan that could reduce official corruption and increase accountability. It wants to scrap one of the two chambers of the Diet to hasten decision making and reduce the gridlock that stops virtually all change in Japan.

安倍晋三的自民党所做的一切只是提醒选民，即使在福岛核事故之后，核工业仍然是牵线的傀儡。桥本为人民而非企业而战，这对他来说是件好事。这让我们感觉到，不同意见对东京的既得利益者来说是多么危险--以及为什么日本需要更多这样的人。桥本呼吁加强问责制和竞争，这一点尤其值得欢迎。他所在的日本维新党主张直接选举首相，这将是日本一场真正的革命，可以减少官员腐败，加强问责制。该党希望废除国会两院中的一院，以加快决策进程，减少阻碍日本几乎所有变革的僵局。



The dark side of this would be a charismatic leader becoming too powerful—even dictatorial. That has opponents calling the movement “Hashism,” a play on fascism. This is a minor risk in a nation with so many checks and balances embedded in its postwar system of government. What really worries the establishment is new ideas that leave its carefully built fiefdoms out of the loop. This really is the point. Japan is a prosperous, safe, and politically stable place. Yet, it may be a little too stable and in turn change-averse. Public debt is more than twice the size of Japan’s economy, the population is aging rapidly, and its global competitiveness is waning. How is the government responding? It is adding to the debt. In May 2012, Fitch Ratings cut Japan’s sovereign-debt rating, calling the government’s fiscal strategy “leisurely.” Well, that description applies to everything from energy policy to raising productivity to boosting the birthrate to encouraging entrepreneurship to lowering trade barriers to improving corporate governance to increasing female participation in the labor force to liberalizing immigration.

这样做的阴暗面是，有魅力的领导人变得过于强大，甚至独断专行。这使得反对者将这一运动称为 "哈希姆主义"，即法西斯主义。对于一个在战后政府体系中植入了如此多制衡机制的国家来说，这只是一个小风险。真正让建制派担心的是那些让其精心打造的藩篱无所适从的新思想。这确实是问题的关键所在。日本是一个繁荣、安全、政治稳定的地方。然而，它可能有点过于稳定，进而惧怕变化。公共债务是日本经济规模的两倍多，人口迅速老龄化，全球竞争力正在减弱。政府是如何应对的呢？它在增加债务。2012 年 5 月，惠誉评级公司下调了日本的主权债务评级，称日本政府的财政策略 "悠闲"。从能源政策到提高生产率，从提高出生率到鼓励创业，从降低贸易壁垒到改善公司治理，从提高女性劳动力参与率到放宽移民政策，无一不是如此。



Love the Tea Party or hate it, it challenged the status quo in Washington in unpredictable ways. The same goes for the Arab Spring, which not only shook the Middle East and North Africa, but also sent waves of fear through the halls of power from Beijing to Mexico City. Japan, it has long been said, needs a new generation of leaders to step forward and engineer a major course correction. Hashimoto, love him or hate him, personifies it, and the extent to which he makes the establishment squirm, and play the Hitler card, suggests this political upstart is on to something.

不管你喜欢还是讨厌茶党，它都以难以预料的方式挑战着华盛顿的现状。阿拉伯之春 "也是如此，它不仅震撼了中东和北非，也在从北京到墨西哥城的权力机构中掀起了惊涛骇浪。一直以来，人们都在说，日本需要新一代领导人挺身而出，对路线进行重大调整。无论人们对桥本是爱是恨，他都是这一理念的化身，而他让当权者扭扭捏捏、大打希特勒牌的程度也表明，这位政治新秀是有想法的。





The Galapagos Syndrome manifests itself elsewhere in the economy. Insularity plagues its entertainment industry, one that’s never thought seriously about going global. It’s fascinating, for example, that the one Asian pop star to go truly global in the last 30 years wasn’t Japanese but a performer from a nation whose population is more than two and a half times smaller: Korea’s Psy. His 2012 hit, “Gangnam Style,” went global in a way none of J-pop’s biggest acts ever did. Psy became a YouTube smash, earned gigs on The Ellen DeGeneres Show and NBC’s Today Show, and single-handedly strengthens Korea’s global brand and “soft power.”

加拉帕戈斯综合症还表现在经济领域的其他方面。封闭性困扰着该国的娱乐业，该行业从未认真考虑过走向世界。举例来说，过去 30 年里真正走向世界的亚洲流行歌星并非日本人，而是来自一个人口比日本少两倍半多的国家：他就是韩国的 Psy。他在 2012 年推出的热门歌曲《江南style》在全球范围内掀起了一股热潮，这是 J-pop 歌星中从未有过的。Psy 在 YouTube 上一炮而红，在《艾伦-德杰尼勒斯秀》（The Ellen DeGeneres Show）和 NBC 的《今日秀》（Today Show）上赢得了演出机会，并以一己之力加强了韩国的全球品牌和 "软实力"。



Why is this so? The reason is found in the insularity of Japan’s entertainment industry. Just like Japan’s mobile phones, its music travels badly outside the nation. For this, there are two main explanations: One is the formidable size of Japan’s domestic market. Its lucrativeness reduces incentives to heading overseas or bothering to record songs and videos in English. The other is that large swaths of Japan’s entertainment business are controlled by the mafia.

为什么会这样呢？原因在于日本娱乐业的封闭性。就像日本的手机一样，日本的音乐也很难走出国门。这主要有两个原因：其一是日本国内市场的巨大规模。日本国内市场利润丰厚，这降低了人们前往海外或费心录制英文歌曲和视频的积极性。另一个原因是，日本娱乐业的大部分业务由黑手党控制。



The first phenomenon also can be seen in the movie industry, and a 2005 Hollywood film about Japan tells the story. Roger Ebert put it well in his scathing review: “I suspect that the more you know about Japan and movies, the less you will enjoy Memoirs of a Geisha.” So began the late Chicago Sun-Times critic’s take on a film that created more hard feelings than buzz in Asia. It wasn’t the reception director Rob Marshall anticipated; he thought completing the first big-budget Hollywood production with an all-Asian cast would endear him to Asian audiences.

第一种现象也可见于电影业，2005 年好莱坞一部关于日本的电影就讲述了这个故事。罗杰-伊伯特（Roger Ebert）在他尖刻的影评中说得很好："我怀疑，你对日本和电影了解得越多，就越不会喜欢《艺伎回忆录》。这位已故的《芝加哥太阳时报》影评人对这部在亚洲引起的反响远大于热议的影片的评价就是这样开始的。这并不是导演罗伯-马歇尔（Rob Marshall）所期待的结果；他以为完成第一部全亚洲演员阵容的好莱坞大制作会让亚洲观众对他产生好感。



Yet Japanese were put off by the casting of Chinese in main roles and made claims of cultural insensitivity. And Chinese were outraged that actresses Zhang Ziyi and Gong Li appear in a film that romanticizes Japan during World War II—and that Zhang did a love scene with a Japanese man, played by Ken Watanabe. Americans, meanwhile, were indifferent, if tepid box-office receipts are any guide. The dustup actually offered insights for Asian governments trying to get along, corporate executives struggling to compete, and investors grappling to make sense of it all.

然而，日本人对中国人出演主要角色感到不快，并声称这是对文化的麻木不仁。中国人对女演员章子怡和巩俐出演一部将二战时期的日本浪漫化的电影感到愤怒，而且章子怡还与渡边谦饰演的日本男子上演了一场爱情戏。而美国人则无动于衷，如果票房不温不火的话。实际上，这场风波为试图和睦相处的亚洲各国政府、努力参与竞争的企业高管以及努力了解这一切的投资者提供了启示。



The film at the center of this controversy, as the late Ebert said, wasn’t a very good one. A highly simplified adaptation of Arthur Golden’s 1997 novel, it told the tale of a poor fisherman’s daughter who is sold into quasi-slavery in Kyoto in 1929 and, against all odds, eventually becomes the city’s reigning geisha. The subtleties of Golden’s book, its almost Flaubertian attention to detail and historical context, were lost on the film. It’s less about Japan or the stillness, grace, and traditions of one of its most rarefied cultural icons than backstage bitchery. Above all, it was a movie about beautiful, exotically dressed women hissing and backstabbing to become Kyoto’s premier geisha and win the men they love. At first glance, it seemed like a Jane Austen tale with some Charles Dickens tossed in. But the end product played more like Desperate Housewives in kimonos.

正如已故的伊伯特所说，这场争论的焦点电影并不是一部好电影。影片高度简化地改编自阿瑟-戈登 1997 年的小说，讲述了一个贫穷渔民的女儿在 1929 年被卖到京都沦为半奴隶，并在万般无奈之下最终成为该市当之无愧的艺妓的故事。戈登书中的精妙之处，对细节和历史背景近乎福楼拜式的关注，在电影中却消失殆尽。与其说这是一部关于日本或日本最稀有的文化象征之一的静谧、优雅和传统的电影，不如说它是一部关于后台琐事的电影。最重要的是，这部电影讲述的是衣着华丽的美女们为了成为京都首屈一指的艺妓并赢得她们心爱的男人而声嘶力竭、背信弃义的故事。乍一看，这似乎是一个简-奥斯汀的故事，其中还夹杂了一些查尔斯-狄更斯的作品。但最终的结局更像是穿着和服的绝望主妇。



Oddly, though, Memoirs of a Geisha became an unlikely flashpoint in Japan–Chinese relations, and a timely one, too. Asia’s boom is fraught with risks, including power struggles, high energy prices, terrorism, pollution, and economic competition from the West. Sadly, the leaders of Japan and China can’t even get in a room together and talk without trading recriminations over World War II. Just like director Marshall, the leaders of Japan and China missed the real story and focused on the theatrics surrounding it. Japan’s qualms with Memoirs of a Geisha miss a bigger point relevant to Asia’s largest economy. Yes, a film with so specific a setting should star Japanese. While many seethe that major roles went to Zhang, Li, and Malaysian actress Michelle Yeoh, Marshall also had a point. His casting decisions reflected a dearth of internationally known Japanese actors who can speak English.

但奇怪的是，《艺伎回忆录》却成了日中关系中一个不可能的热点，而且是一个及时的热点。亚洲的繁荣充满了风险，包括权力斗争、高昂的能源价格、恐怖主义、污染以及来自西方的经济竞争。可悲的是，日本和中国的领导人甚至不能坐在一个房间里交谈，而不对第二次世界大战进行指责。就像马歇尔导演一样，日本和中国的领导人都忽略了真实的故事，而专注于围绕它的戏剧性。日本对《艺伎回忆录》的不满忽略了与亚洲最大经济体相关的更重要的一点。是的，一部背景如此特殊的电影应该由日本人主演。虽然许多人对张艺谋、李冰冰和马来西亚女演员杨紫琼出演主要角色感到恼火，但马歇尔也有他的道理。他的选角决定反映了国际上缺乏能说英语的知名日本演员。



Hollywood wouldn’t have made the film if it thought it wouldn’t appeal to the lucrative yet subtitle-averse U.S. market. One reason there are few globally known Japanese actors: Japan’s large domestic market creates few incentives for film studios and actors to search for audiences or projects abroad. There’s a lesson here for Japan Inc. Japanese are ravenous consumers and, until now, its market seemed big enough. As sales soared in the heady 1980s and stayed reasonably brisk during the recession-plagued 1990s, companies were slow to look abroad, the mobile-telephone industry being among them.

如果好莱坞认为这部影片无法吸引利润丰厚但又不喜欢字幕的美国市场，它就不会拍摄这部影片。全球知名的日本演员很少，这也是原因之一：日本庞大的国内市场几乎不鼓励电影制片厂和演员到国外寻找观众或项目。这给日本公司上了一课。日本人是如饥似渴的消费者，直到现在，日本的市场似乎才足够大。随着 20 世纪 80 年代销售额的飙升，以及 20 世纪 90 年代经济衰退时期销售额的稳定增长，各家公司迟迟没有将目光投向海外，移动电话行业就是其中之一。



Yet, you can’t use the vast majority of the phones or their functionality overseas. That insular focus is a problem amid Japan’s rapidly aging population and competition from countries such as Korea, home to Samsung Electronics Co. and its dazzling line of Galaxy products. The real story behind the Memoirs of a Geisha ruckus is that corporate Japan needs to think more globally. Japan Inc.’s future prosperity depends on looking to new markets.

然而，绝大多数手机及其功能都无法在海外使用。在日本人口迅速老龄化的背景下，在韩国三星电子公司及其令人眼花缭乱的 Galaxy 系列产品的竞争中，这种封闭式的关注成为了一个问题。艺伎回忆录》风波背后的真正原因是，日本企业需要更全球化的思维。日本公司未来的繁荣取决于对新市场的展望。



Chinese critics missed the point, too. Seeing homegrown actresses eclipse Japan’s should be reason to celebrate China’s rising dominance not only in the area of economics, but culture. Instead, nationalist tendencies spoiled the moment in the spotlight. When it comes to Asia’s past, there’s plenty of blame to go around. Japan needs to go further to apologize for its atrocities and its prime ministers should stop visiting a Tokyo shrine honoring some convicted war criminals among the war dead. China isn’t blameless, either, as it foments a volatile strain of nationalism that increasingly unnerves its neighbors in Asia.

中国的评论家们也没有抓住重点。看到中国本土女演员在日本女演员面前黯然失色，本应是庆祝中国不仅在经济领域，而且在文化领域崛起的理由。然而，民族主义倾向却破坏了这一聚光灯下的时刻。谈到亚洲的过去，有很多责任需要承担。日本需要更进一步为其暴行道歉，其首相也应停止参拜东京的一座神社，该神社供奉着战死者中的一些战犯。中国也难辞其咎，因为它煽动的民族主义动荡不安，日益令亚洲邻国感到不安。



Finally, there’s a lesson here for investors. While it may come as a surprise to folks in the West, Chinese, Japanese, and Koreans don’t tend to think they look alike. Hollywood’s who’d-know-the-difference mind-set in casting films is comparable to how many investors and executives view Asia. Some see it as an undifferentiated collection of nations that is hard to get their arms around. Asia’s economies are incredibly diverse. Those who think China’s rise is a repeat of Japan’s do so at their own peril. The same is true of India’s development versus China’s. If you think Europe is having a tough time getting the 18 euro-zone economies on similar footing, just wait until Asia tries. Foreign filmmakers can take artistic license with their casting decisions. They are free to make assumptions about Asians’ appearances and sensibilities. Such oversimplification isn’t an option for those looking to make money in the region. Respecting the vast differences that exist here may help investors find the Hollywood ending they seek.

最后，投资者可以从中得到启示。中国人、日本人和韩国人并不认为他们长得像，这可能会让西方人感到惊讶。好莱坞在选片时 "谁知道谁不一样 "的心态与许多投资者和高管对亚洲的看法不谋而合。有些人认为亚洲是一个无差别的国家集合体，难以驾驭。亚洲经济的多样性令人难以置信。那些认为中国的崛起是日本崛起的翻版的人是在自寻烦恼。印度的发展与中国相比也是如此。如果你认为欧洲很难让欧元区 18 个经济体站在同一起跑线上，那就等着看亚洲的努力吧。外国电影制片人可以在选角决定上采取艺术许可。他们可以随意对亚洲人的外表和情感做出假设。对于那些想在亚洲赚钱的人来说，这种过于简单化的做法是不可取的。尊重这里存在的巨大差异，可能有助于投资者找到他们所寻求的好莱坞结局。



Part of the problem is that Japan just isn’t very good at marketing itself. In 2009, for example, one of then–Prime Minister Taro Aso’s plans to attract foreign tourists was schoolgirls. His government sent a teenage girl wearing a miniskirted uniform abroad to enhance Japan’s international profile and, by extension, the economy. Never mind that at 19, actress Shizuka Fujioka was no longer a schoolgirl. She traveled the world with two other young women as cultural envoys. The plan was to capitalize on Japan’s long-running craze for all things cute. Many found the campaign creepy. Fujioka was joined on the road by Misako Aoki, dressed in the doll-like “Gothic Lolita style,” and Yu Kimura, who showed off the “Harajuku style.” Such fashions attract armies of amateur paparazzi in Japan, an uncomfortable number of whom are middle-aged men. More recently, post-2011 earthquake, the government dispatched members of a girl group called AKB48 to the United States and elsewhere as emissaries of Japan. It was an odd choice, given their whole shtick: 20-year-olds dolled up like 14-year-old schoolgirls and performing for middle-aged men. Is that really the best Japan can do to promote itself?

问题的部分原因在于日本并不擅长营销自己。例如，2009 年，时任首相麻生太郎吸引外国游客的计划之一就是女学生。他的政府派遣了一名身穿迷你裙制服的少女出国，以提升日本的国际形象，进而促进经济发展。别忘了，19 岁的女演员藤冈静香已经不再是女学生了。她与另外两名年轻女性作为文化使者周游世界。她们的计划是利用日本长期以来对可爱事物的狂热。许多人觉得这个活动令人毛骨悚然。青木美佐子（Misako Aoki）和木村优（Yu Kimura）穿着洋娃娃般的 "哥特洛丽塔风格"，展示了 "原宿风格"。这种时尚在日本吸引了大批业余狗仔队，其中不乏中年男子。最近，2011 年大地震后，政府派遣女子组合 AKB48 成员作为日本使者前往美国和其他国家。这是一个奇怪的选择，因为她们的整个伎俩是：20 岁的少女打扮得像 14 岁的女学生，为中年男子表演。难道这真的是日本为宣传自己所能做的最好的事情吗？



There’s a trying-too-hard quality to much of Japan’s international marketing apparatus. Oddly, one of the best boosters for tourism, at least temporarily, was a 2003 American film that at times poked fun at Japanese culture, Sofia Coppola’s Lost in Translation. Many Japanese quibbled, and often appropriately, with the triteness of some of the movie’s observations—including a few too many jokes about the inability of Japanese to pronounce the letter L. All too often, the depiction of Japanese was cartoon-like.

日本的许多国际营销手段都有一种勉为其难的味道。奇怪的是，2003 年索菲亚-科波拉（Sofia Coppola）执导的《迷失在翻译中》（Lost in Translation）是一部时不时拿日本文化开涮的美国电影，它至少暂时对旅游业起到了最好的促进作用。许多日本人对电影中一些乏味的观点--包括关于日本人不会发字母 "L "的笑话--提出质疑，而且往往是恰如其分的。



But the film, starring Bill Murray, also managed something extraordinary: It helped many foreigners operationalize their notions about Japan. After seeing it, many felt Japan didn’t seem so foreign anymore. It succeeded in showing the different faces of Japan. Japan has never really harnessed the vast potential of tourism as a growth industry. With its multitude of temples, World Heritage sites, quirky cities, incredible cuisine, and reputation for convenience and safety, Japan should be a people magnet.

不过，这部由比尔-莫瑞主演的电影也做了一件非同寻常的事：它帮助许多外国人将他们对日本的概念具体化。看完影片后，许多人觉得日本不再那么陌生了。它成功地展现了日本的不同面貌。日本从未真正利用旅游业作为增长产业的巨大潜力。日本拥有众多的寺庙、世界遗产、奇特的城市、令人难以置信的美食以及便利和安全的声誉，应该成为一个吸引游客的地方。



Yet in 2012, it didn’t even break the top 20 tourist destinations in the UN World Tourism Organization’s annual ranking. China, Korea, Macau, Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand stamp more foreign passports each year than Japan.

然而，在 2012 年联合国世界旅游组织的年度排名中，日本甚至没有进入前 20 名旅游目的地之列。中国、韩国、澳门、马来西亚、新加坡和泰国每年签发的外国护照比日本还多。



The economic potential of films shouldn’t be dismissed. The Lord of the Rings franchise, for example, did wonders for New Zealand, where they were filmed. Tourists continue to flock there to see where J. R. R. Tolkien’s books were brought to life for moviegoers the world over. The good news is that Japan is waking up to the potential of culture exports. With gross domestic product being such a yawner in recent years, entrepreneurs and even government officials have been promoting Japan’s “gross national cool” instead.

电影的经济潜力不容忽视。例如，《指环王》系列电影为新西兰创造了奇迹。游客们不断涌向新西兰，一睹托尔金的著作为全世界电影观众带来的栩栩如生的场景。好消息是，日本已经意识到文化出口的潜力。近年来，随着国内生产总值的低迷，企业家甚至政府官员都开始宣传日本的 "国民酷"。



That phrase was reportedly coined by Douglas McGray, who penned a 2002 Foreign Policy magazine piece about Japan reinventing itself as cultural powerhouse. “Over the course of an otherwise dismal decade, Japan has been perfecting the art of transmitting certain kinds of mass culture,” he wrote. And the government wasted no time coming up with a “Cool Japan” campaign, hoping a bigger global footprint would offset domestic gloom. But the decade since then hasn’t been encouraging, as the obsession with schoolgirls attests.

据报道，这句话是由道格拉斯-麦克格雷（Douglas McGray）提出的，他在 2002 年的《外交政策》杂志上撰写了一篇关于日本重塑文化强国形象的文章。"他写道："在这令人沮丧的十年中，日本一直在完善传播某种大众文化的艺术。政府不失时机地发起了 "酷日本 "运动，希望通过扩大全球足迹来抵消国内的阴霾。但此后的十年并不令人鼓舞，对女学生的痴迷就证明了这一点。



Still, the ideal is perfectly understandable. If Seoul can cash in on the “Korean Wave” movement, why can’t Japan? For all its paradoxes, controversies, idiosyncrasies, and hypocrisies, America does very well from its cultural exports. It’s the business of globalization, after all. Nation-states are increasingly obsessed with branding. In 2013, for example, Japan launched the state-backed Cool Japan Fund Inc. Led by former Carlyle Group manager Koichiro Yoshizaki, the $560 million fund will promote products the nation deems internationally trendy, from sushi and ramen noodles to manga comics to anime to pop music to kawaii fashion to cosplay (costume play). But as pundits like Nancy Snow, a visiting professor at Keio University, point out, Japan’s efforts are more often than not lost in translation.

不过，这种理想还是完全可以理解的。如果首尔能从 "韩流 "运动中获利，为什么日本不能呢？尽管美国存在种种矛盾、争议、怪癖和虚伪，但它的文化出口却非常成功。毕竟，这是全球化的生意。民族国家越来越痴迷于品牌建设。例如，2013年，日本推出了由国家支持的 "酷日本基金"（Cool Japan Fund Inc.该基金由凯雷集团前经理吉崎晃一郎领导，投资额达5.6亿美元，将推广日本认为是国际潮流的产品，从寿司和拉面到漫画、动漫、流行音乐、卡哇伊时装到Cosplay（化装游戏）。但是，正如庆应义塾大学客座教授南希-斯诺（Nancy Snow）等专家所指出的，日本的努力往往在翻译中迷失方向。



“Cool Japan is anything but,” Snow wrote in a November 7, 2013, op-ed in Tokyo’s Metropolis magazine.

"斯诺在 2013 年 11 月 7 日发表在东京《大都会》杂志上的专栏文章中写道："酷日本并非如此。



A fundamental rule of persuasion is that if you have to identify yourself or your institution as “cool,” then you aren’t and it isn’t. Frank Sinatra and Sammy Davis Jr. would have never made the Rat Pack such an American cultural phenomenon if they had announced their coolness at every stop. “Hey cats. Aren’t we cool? Look how we dress, drink on stage, and have bromance banter with one another. Cool, huh?” The Rat Pack allowed others to define their style and manner.

说服人的一条基本规则是，如果你必须把自己或你的机构标榜为 "酷"，那么你就不是 "酷"，它也不是 "酷"。如果弗兰克-西纳特拉（Frank Sinatra）和小萨米-戴维斯（Sammy Davis Jr."嘿，猫咪们我们很酷吧？看看我们怎么穿衣打扮，在舞台上喝酒，还互相戏谑。酷吧？"鼠帮乐队允许别人定义他们的风格和方式。





One recent example came from Ikuo Kabashima, governor of Kumamoto Prefecture in western Japan, who in November 2013 tried a little mascot diplomacy. Perhaps no country is more obsessed with “cute” than Japan, and the place is awash in furry mascots. Some of these cuddly critters would travel poorly outside Japan, of course. Fukushima Prefecture’s bizarrely named “Fukuppy”—blending the first part of “Fukushima” with the last part of “happy”—is a case in point. Beat cops in Boston would surely chuckle at seeing the Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department’s orange “Peepo” amulet. Still, Kabashima thought he’d take his “Kumamon” to Harvard in November, where he lectured on how to “maximize the overall happiness” of a city’s residents. That left many Harvard students and faculty asking a very valid question: Huh?

最近的一个例子是，日本西部熊本县县长蒲岛郁夫（Ikuo Kabashima）于 2013 年 11 月尝试了一次吉祥物外交。也许没有哪个国家比日本更痴迷于 "可爱"，这里充斥着毛茸茸的吉祥物。当然，其中一些可爱的小动物在日本以外的国家并不受欢迎。福岛县的 "Fukuppy"（"福岛 "的前半部分与 "快乐 "的后半部分相融合）就是一个很好的例子。如果波士顿的警察看到东京警视厅的橙色 "Peepo "护身符，一定会大笑不止。尽管如此，11 月，Kabashima 还是带着他的 "Kumamon "来到哈佛大学，就如何 "最大限度地提高 "城市居民的 "整体幸福感 "发表了演讲。这让许多哈佛师生提出了一个非常有道理的问题：哈？



The concept can flop at home, too. In June 2010, the Ministry of Finance launched a truly desperate advertising campaign arguing that women are seeking men who invest in government bonds. “Playboys are no good,” the ad had a young Japanese woman declaring. “I want my future husband to be diligent about money.” She’s one of five buxom women featured on the page, which says, “Men who hold JGBs are popular with women!!”

这个概念在国内也会失败。2010 年 6 月，日本财务省推出了一则令人绝望的广告，声称女性正在寻找投资国债的男性。"花花公子不是好东西"，广告中一位年轻的日本女性宣称。"我希望我未来的丈夫能勤于理财"她是网页上五位丰满女性中的一位，网页上写道："持有日本国债的男人受女性欢迎！"



The ministry hoped the ads would appeal to citizens at a time when record government borrowing threatens to outstrip demand. The government’s plan to attract marrying-age men comes after a campaign aimed at retirees started in August 2009. That push featured Junko Kubo, a former anchor on Japan’s public broadcaster NHK, in ads placed in the backs of taxicabs. Kubo followed Koyuki, an actress and model who in 2003 appeared in The Last Samurai with Tom Cruise as well as posters for government bonds. Talk about desperation.

在创纪录的政府借贷有可能超过需求之际，该部希望这些广告能吸引市民。政府吸引适婚年龄男性的计划是在 2009 年 8 月开始的针对退休人员的宣传活动之后推出的。久保顺子（Junko Kubo）曾是日本公共广播公司 NHK 的主播，她在出租车车尾的广告中扮演了这一角色。继久保之后，2003 年与汤姆-克鲁斯（Tom Cruise）合作出演《最后的武士》的演员兼模特小雪（Koyuki）也出现在政府债券的海报上。说到绝望。



“It doesn’t take a Chinese female astronaut to conclude that Cool Japan is a government and industry production directed predominantly by men with a feminine ideal that doesn’t exist,” Snow said.

"斯诺说："不需要一个中国女宇航员就能得出结论，《酷日本》是一部主要由男性导演的政府和行业作品，其女性理想并不存在。



Where are the images and ideas of the women scientists and financial executives, as well as the geek girls who don’t want to be viewed through the narrow confines of pubescent cuteness? I’m not against cuteness, just its monopolization. Why not fund the next film giants like Akira Kurosawa or Yasujiro Ozu rather than the next AKB48 spinoff?

女科学家和女财务主管的形象和思想，以及那些不愿意被青春期的可爱所束缚的宅女的形象和思想在哪里？我并不反对可爱，只是反对它被垄断。为什么不资助像黑泽明或小津安二郎这样的下一位电影巨匠，而不是下一部 AKB48 的衍生作品呢？





And then there’s the yakuza. Hollywood has long fetishized Japanese gangsters with their full-body tattoos, missing pinkies, and harems of buxom groupies. Ever since Sydney Pollack’s The Yakuza in 1974, they have provided periodic fodder for directors from Ridley Scott to Quentin Tarantino. Yet, curiously, studios are suddenly abuzz with a flurry of Japanese mob films. Warner Bros. is developing The Outsider. Robert Whiting’s 1999 book, Tokyo Underworld, which has gotten nibbles from Martin Scorsese, is being made into a cable-television series. Perhaps most timely of all, Jake Adelstein’s 2010 memoir, Tokyo Vice, is coming to the big screen. Its star, Daniel Radcliffe of Harry Potter fame, will ensure wide release around the globe.

还有黑帮。长期以来，好莱坞一直迷恋日本黑帮，因为他们有全身纹身、缺失的小指和成群结队的美艳女粉丝。自 1974 年悉尼-波拉克（Sydney Pollack）导演的《极道家族》（The Yakuza）以来，从雷德利-斯科特（Ridley Scott）到昆汀-塔伦蒂诺（Quentin Tarantino）等导演都定期为他们提供素材。然而奇怪的是，电影公司突然热衷于拍摄日本黑帮电影。华纳兄弟公司正在开发《局外人》。罗伯特-怀廷（Robert Whiting）在 1999 年出版的《东京黑社会》一书得到了马丁-斯科塞斯（Martin Scorsese）的青睐，正在被制作成有线电视连续剧。也许最及时的是，杰克-阿德尔斯坦（Jake Adelstein）2010 年的回忆录《东京风云》（Tokyo Vice）即将搬上大银幕。哈利-波特》的主演丹尼尔-雷德克里夫将确保该片在全球广泛上映。



Adelstein’s life story as a crusading Tokyo reporter exposing the mob’s infiltration of the mainstream economy (and being out under police protection) dovetails remarkably well with recent events. Tokyo is aghast as banking giants like Mizuho Financial Group Inc. get busted making yakuza loans and the U.S. Treasury Department freezes assets. It’s time Japan stamped out gangs Adelstein calls “Goldman Sachs with guns.” “There’s a lot in the book about organized crime’s ties into the political and financial sphere, and as the years have passed, much of it has proven to be prescient,” Adelstein said.

阿德斯坦作为一名揭露黑帮渗透主流经济的东京记者（在警方保护下出狱），他的人生经历与最近发生的事件非常吻合。瑞穗金融集团（Mizuho Financial Group Inc.现在是日本铲除阿德斯坦称之为 "持枪高盛 "的黑帮的时候了。"阿德尔斯坦说："书中有很多关于有组织犯罪与政治和金融领域的联系的内容，随着时间的推移，很多内容都被证明是有先见之明的。



It may surprise many to learn that, unlike America, the yakuza operates legally and in plain sight. Japan’s roughly 63,000 organized-crime members hand out business cards and have office buildings, fanzines, out-in-the-open control over large chunks of the entertainment trade, and significant political influence. When they aren’t collecting protection money, shaking down shop owners, or running prostitution rings, the yakuza are dabbling more and more in mainstream finance, including stock dealing, flipping real estate, and acquiring companies.

许多人可能会惊讶地发现，与美国不同，日本黑帮的活动是合法的，而且是在众目睽睽之下。日本约有 63,000 名有组织犯罪成员，他们派发名片，拥有办公楼、粉丝杂志，公开控制着娱乐业的大块业务，并在政治上具有重大影响力。在不收取保护费、不敲诈店主、不经营卖淫集团的时候，山口组越来越多地涉足主流金融领域，包括股票交易、炒卖房地产和收购公司。



Take Shinsuke Shimada, who is often called “the Jay Leno of Japan.” Tongues wagged around the nation in August 2011 when one of television’s most famous faces was found to be in the orbit of a notorious organized-crime gang, Yamaguchi-gumi.

岛田信介常被称为 "日本的杰伊-雷诺"。2011 年 8 月，当电视界最著名的面孔之一被发现与臭名昭著的有组织犯罪团伙山口组有牵连时，全国上下都议论纷纷。



“But Shimada is only one of many celebrities with yakuza ties,” Adelstein wrote in a September 23, 2011, Daily Beast article.

"阿德尔斯坦在 2011 年 9 月 23 日的《野兽日报》（Daily Beast）上写道："但岛田只是众多与黑道有联系的名人之一。



In the last few weeks, extensive evidence has emerged that Japanese show business is saturated with the yakuza’s influence. Police records and sources, along with testimony from current and former yakuza members, have revealed that many powerful Japanese talent agencies and production companies are not simply fronts for the yakuza—they are the yakuza. For instance, Rikiya Yasuoka, a Japanese movie star, was allegedly once a member of an organized crime group, and attended and sang at a birthday party for the former don of Japan’s entertainment business, Tadamasa Goto, the John Gotti of Japan.

过去几周，大量证据表明，日本演艺界受黑社会的影响已达到饱和状态。警方记录和消息来源，以及现任和前任黑社会成员的证词显示，日本许多强大的艺人经纪公司和制片公司不仅仅是黑社会的幌子，他们就是黑社会。例如，日本电影明星安冈利佳（Rikiya Yasuoka）据称曾是一个有组织犯罪团伙的成员，并参加了日本娱乐业前老大、日本的约翰-高蒂（John Gotti）后藤忠政（Tadamasa Goto）的生日派对，还在派对上演唱了歌曲。





The entertainment business has long been dominated by the yakuza, who push for romanticized depictions of their brethren. They also wield tremendous power over Japanese talent agencies, which form the core of the entire industry. That has Japan cracking down, partly at the behest of the United States, partly as a necessary element of Abe’s drive to increase Japan’s competiveness. But Japan must go much further and dig much deeper to separate its gray economy from the formal one. Many industry observers believe Japan’s inclusion in the U.S.-led Trans-Pacific Partnership would shake up the nation’s entertainment cabal as never before by, at least in theory, forcing more international norms on it.

长期以来，娱乐业一直被黑社会所控制，他们对自己的兄弟进行浪漫化的描述。他们还对构成整个行业核心的日本艺人经纪公司拥有巨大的权力。日本对此进行了打击，部分原因是美国的要求，部分原因是安倍晋三提高日本竞争力的必要因素。但日本必须走得更远，挖掘得更深，才能将灰色经济与正规经济区分开来。许多行业观察家认为，日本加入美国主导的跨太平洋伙伴关系将前所未有地撼动日本的娱乐业集团，至少在理论上，将迫使其遵守更多的国际规范。





Oddly, much of the recent pressure to crack down on the gangsters originates with Barack Obama. In a post–September 11 world, the United States is concerned that Japan is too lax on cross-border organized crime and the huge, opaque sums of money the yakuza send zooming around the globe. The U.S. Treasury Department estimates that Japan’s biggest crime family, the Kobe-based Yamaguchi-gumi, alone generates “billions of dollars annually.”

奇怪的是，最近打击黑帮的压力主要来自奥巴马。在 "9-11 "事件后的世界里，美国担心日本对跨境有组织犯罪以及黑帮向全球输送的巨额不透明资金过于松懈。据美国财政部估计，日本最大的犯罪家族--总部设在神户的山口组，每年就能创造 "数十亿美元的收入"。



Japan’s few enforcement efforts all too often lack teeth. In 2011, the Financial Services Agency enacted ordinances making it harder to do business with the yakuza, but didn’t outlaw such groups outright. Then something unexpected happened: Obama’s White House pounced with an executive order demanding that financial institutions freeze yakuza assets. In 2012, Washington blacklisted the Yamaguchi-gumi. The Treasury started small, freezing about $55,000 of yakuza holdings, including two American Express cards, according to documents obtained by Bloomberg News under the Freedom of Information Act. The move was a clear slap in the face of Japan’s government, though, not to mention the yakuza.

日本为数不多的执法工作往往缺乏力度。2011 年，金融厅颁布法令，加大了与黑社会做生意的难度，但并未彻底取缔此类组织。然后，意想不到的事情发生了：奥巴马的白宫突然发布行政命令，要求金融机构冻结山口组的资产。2012 年，华盛顿将山口组列入黑名单。根据彭博新闻社根据《信息自由法》获得的文件，财政部从小处着手，冻结了约 5.5 万美元的山口组资产，其中包括两张美国运通卡。但此举显然是在打日本政府的脸，更不用说黑帮了。



Yamaguchi-gumi is the reason Adelstein, 45, is a household name among the underworld. In 1993, the Missouri native became the first non-Japanese to work as a police reporter for Japan’s Yomiuri Shimbun, the world’s largest newspaper. His snooping landed him in serious trouble with Tadamasa Goto, the twisted, Yamaguchi-gumi-affiliated crime boss. Adelstein learned that in 2005 Goto and three other yakuza had somehow received lifesaving liver transplants in California, abetted by U.S. authorities. Adelstein has been under police protection ever since. If Yamaguchi-gumi were listed on the stock exchange, Temple University’s Jeff Kingston wrote in his 2011 book, Contemporary Japan, it “would be the Toyota in its sector.” Morgan Stanley economist Robert Feldman once called the gang Japan’s “largest private-equity group.”

山口组是 45 岁的阿德斯坦在黑社会中家喻户晓的原因。1993 年，这位密苏里州人成为第一位在日本最大的报纸《读卖新闻》担任警察记者的非日本人。他的窥探行为让他与山口组下属的扭曲犯罪头目后藤忠正（Tadamasa Goto）结下了不解之缘。阿德斯坦得知，2005 年，后藤和其他三名黑帮分子在美国当局的唆使下，在加利福尼亚州接受了救命的肝脏移植手术。此后，阿德尔斯坦一直受到警方保护。坦普尔大学的杰夫-金斯顿（Jeff Kingston）在 2011 年出版的《当代日本》一书中写道，如果山口组在证券交易所上市，它 "将成为该行业中的丰田"。摩根士丹利经济学家罗伯特-费尔德曼（Robert Feldman）曾称山口组为日本 "最大的私人股权投资集团"。



In 2007, Feldman wrote a report detailing how the yakuza held Japan back:

2007 年，费尔德曼撰写了一份报告，详细描述了黑社会是如何拖日本后腿的：



The influence of organized crime in both political and corporate/financial circles remains a barrier to an efficient economy and efficient financial markets. The loser has been Japan’s competitiveness. It seems unreasonable to expect foreign companies and investors to expand activity in Japan while the issues with organized crime remain so troubling.

有组织犯罪在政界和企业/金融界的影响仍然是高效经济和高效金融市场的障碍。日本的竞争力一直是个输家。在有组织犯罪问题依然令人担忧的情况下，期望外国公司和投资者扩大在日本的活动似乎是不合理的。





Six years on, the situation is only modestly improved.

六年过去了，情况只是略有改善。



Abe should use his second stint as leader to accelerate the crackdown on Japan’s crime syndicates. You can bet the yakuza’s vast and detrimental role in the economy will be a sticking point in Japan’s negotiations to join the U.S.-led Trans-Pacific Partnership. A burst of Olympics-related spending between now and 2020 will offer all-too-many opportunities for graft and extortion. Why not just go ahead and made the mobsters formally illegal now and round them up? Their ranks are thinning—there were 87,000 gangsters in 2004—but not nearly fast enough.

安倍应该利用他第二次担任领导人的机会，加速打击日本的犯罪集团。可以肯定的是，山口组在日本经济中扮演的庞大而有害的角色，将成为日本加入美国主导的跨太平洋伙伴关系谈判的一个症结所在。从现在到 2020 年，与奥运会相关的大量支出将为贪污和敲诈提供太多的机会。为什么不现在就把这些黑帮分子正式定为非法，然后将他们一网打尽呢？他们的队伍正在缩小--2004 年有 87,000 名黑帮分子，但速度还不够快。



I asked Adelstein a question he gets often these days: How does it feel being played by Harry Potter? The answer was a bit surprising. “I can’t think of anyone else I’d rather have be me,” Adelstein said. “If they reissue the book with his picture on the cover, I can fade into obscurity rather nicely, I imagine.” Even if that doesn’t work, Adelstein remains hopeful that his life can one day return to normal. “By 2020, I think their day will be done. That’s not so far away.” It’s not so close, either. For Japan’s sake—not just Adelstein’s—Abe should start hastening the yakuza’s day of reckoning.

我问了阿德斯坦一个他最近经常遇到的问题：被哈利-波特扮演的感觉如何？答案有点出人意料。"阿德斯坦说："我想不出还有谁愿意扮演我。"如果他们重新发行这本书，封面上印上他的照片，我想我可以很好地淡出人们的视线"。即使这样做行不通，阿德尔斯坦仍然希望有一天他的生活能够恢复正常。"到 2020 年，我想他们的日子就会结束了。这并不遥远"。也不是那么近。为了日本--不仅仅是阿德斯坦--安倍晋三应该开始加速黑帮的末日。



Why hasn’t Japanese officialdom been more aggressive? Public opinion, for one thing: Many Japanese harbor romantic notions of yakuza as Robin Hood–like folk heroes who, by keeping crime organized and centralized, help maintain the peace. Political connections, for another: In his book, Whiting explored how crime figure Yoshio Kodama was instrumental in the creation of the Liberal Democratic Party that’s currently leading Japan.

为什么日本官方没有采取更积极的行动呢？首先是公众舆论：许多日本人对极道人怀有浪漫的幻想，认为他们是罗宾汉式的民间英雄，通过保持犯罪的组织化和集中化，帮助维护和平。另一方面是政治关系：惠廷在书中探讨了犯罪人物儿玉义雄如何在创建目前领导日本的自民党过程中发挥了重要作用。



The opposition Democratic Party of Japan has its own yakuza problems. In October 2012, when the DPJ was ruling, Justice Minister Keishu Tanaka resigned after attending a gangster’s wedding and accepting donations from a foreign-run company. Around the same time, Finance Minister Koriki Jojima was fending off allegations in the press that he received gangster support while campaigning. Even then–Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda had to return $20,000 in political donations after one his supporters was arrested as part of a fraud involving a yakuza, according to Adelstein.

反对党日本民主党也有自己的黑帮问题。2012 年 10 月，民主党执政期间，法务大臣田中敬寿因参加黑帮婚礼和接受一家外国公司的捐款而辞职。大约在同一时间，财务大臣城岛幸树被媒体指控在竞选活动中接受黑帮支持，城岛幸树对此进行了回击。据阿德斯坦称，甚至时任首相野田佳彦也不得不退还 2 万美元的政治捐款，因为他的一名支持者因涉嫌黑帮欺诈而被捕。



In other words, it can sometimes be hard to tell where parts of the government end and the yakuza begins. Mobsters, for example, played an unappreciated role in prolonging Japan’s bad-loan crisis of the 1990s. Loans linked even tangentially to the criminal underworld were virtually impossible to collect. On the one hand, bankers were afraid to call many loans. In 1993 and 1994, some bank collections officers were assassinated. On the other hand, the LDP bigwigs were dissuading banks from collecting. In a 2002 exposé, the Far Eastern Economic Review called the lost decade of the 1990s “The Yakuza Recession.”

换句话说，有时很难分清政府部门和黑帮之间的界限。例如，黑帮在延长 20 世纪 90 年代日本不良贷款危机方面发挥了不被重视的作用。即使是与黑社会犯罪有千丝万缕联系的贷款也几乎无法收回。一方面，银行家们不敢催收许多贷款。1993 年和 1994 年，一些银行催收人员遭到暗杀。另一方面，自民党的大佬们也在劝阻银行收款。远东经济评论》（Far Eastern Economic Review）在 2002 年的一篇揭露文章中，将 20 世纪 90 年代失去的十年称为 "极道衰退"。



It’s easy to blame corporate executives for preferring to stay on Galapagos than to venture out of their comfort zones. But in some ways, corporate executives are proving to be gutsier than Prime Minister Abe, who talks much of change but has delivered little thus far: SoftBank’s Son expanding abroad with a bold acquisition of a U.S. wireless provider; Rakuten’s Mikitani taking on the fossilized ideas of Japan’s business lobby and the nuclear industry; Fast Retailing’s Yanai plotting world domination for Uniqlo; Honda’s Takanobu Ito making English the company’s official language.

人们很容易责怪企业高管宁愿留在加拉帕戈斯，也不愿走出自己的舒适区。但在某些方面，企业高管们被证明比安倍首相更有胆识：软银的孙正义大胆收购美国一家无线服务提供商，向海外扩张；乐天的三木谷（Mikitani）与日本商业游说团体和核工业的陈旧观念作斗争；Fast Retailing的柳井正谋划让优衣库称霸世界；本田的伊东孝绅将英语作为公司的官方语言。



While all of these moves might sound obvious to Harvard MBAs, they are out of the norm for Japan Inc. and should be championed and facilitated by Abe’s administration. Add Takeda, a Japanese drug maker that’s more than two centuries old, to the list, as it moves toward naming its first-ever non-Japanese chief executive. The company has hired 20-year GlaxoSmithKline veteran Christophe Weber as chief operating officer with an eye toward having him succeed CEO Yasuchika Hasegawa and, hopefully, pulling off a “Ghosn.”

虽然所有这些举动对哈佛 MBA 来说可能听起来很明显，但对日本公司来说却不寻常，安倍政府应该予以支持和推动。武田制药是一家拥有两个多世纪历史的日本制药公司，该公司正着手任命有史以来第一位非日本籍首席执行官。该公司已聘请在葛兰素史克（GlaxoSmithKline）工作了 20 年的资深人士克里斯托夫-韦伯（Christophe Weber）担任首席运营官，希望他能接替首席执行官长谷川康亲（Yasuchika Hasegawa）的职位，并有希望成为 "戈恩"（Ghosn）。



The reference, of course, is to fellow French passport holder and Nissan chief Carlos Ghosn, the CEO Japanese call “Le Cost Killer.” When he took over the faltering automaker in June 2000 and began cutting jobs and downsizing everything in sight, Ghosn was derided as an evil foreigner running roughshod over the Japanese way. Three years later, Nissan’s turnaround assured, Ghosn had attained rock-star status in both business and culture. His battle to resurrect a corporate zombie even inspired a manga comic book series.

这当然是指持有法国护照的日产汽车公司总裁卡洛斯-戈恩，这位被日本人称为 "成本杀手 "的首席执行官。2000 年 6 月，戈恩接管了这家岌岌可危的汽车制造商，并开始裁员和缩减眼前的一切。三年后，日产扭亏为盈，戈恩在商业和文化界都获得了摇滚明星的地位。他复活企业僵尸的战斗甚至激发了漫画系列的灵感。



Drug maker Takeda’s problems are a microcosm of Japan Inc.’s: an economy in the doldrums, an aging population, rampant price competition from abroad (in Takeda’s case, cheap generic drugs, too), and a corporate culture protective of its clubby ways. The hope is that Weber will shake up the corporate culture, cut costs, and reach abroad to find growing markets. Insularity is a long-standing problem in Japan, and non-Japanese CEOs—only two currently run Nikkei 225 companies—themselves can seem like the business equivalent of the endemic species that Charles Darwin found on the remote islands off Ecuador’s coast. Ghosn is one; Eva Chen of Trend Micro Inc. is another.

制药公司武田的问题是日本公司的一个缩影：经济低迷、人口老龄化、来自国外的激烈价格竞争（对武田而言，还有廉价的仿制药），以及保护其俱乐部方式的企业文化。人们希望韦伯能撼动企业文化，削减成本，并走出国门，寻找不断增长的市场。孤僻是日本长期存在的问题，目前只有两位非日本籍首席执行官在经营日经 225 指数公司，他们自己在商业上就像查尔斯-达尔文在厄瓜多尔海岸偏远岛屿上发现的地方物种。戈恩是其中之一，趋势科技公司的陈怡蓉是另一个。



To his credit, Abe recognized this early on and talked about compelling companies to welcome at least one outside director and a female board member, too. But intense pressure from Japan’s powerful business lobby, Nippon Keidanren, has made Abe water down pledges to make companies more vibrant and responsive to shareholders. Perhaps Abe senses it is counterproductive to cross the CEOs he needs to raise salaries if Abenomics is to have a fighting chance.

值得称赞的是，安倍晋三很早就认识到了这一点，并谈到要迫使公司至少欢迎一名外部董事和一名女性董事会成员。但日本强大的商业游说团体日本经济团体联合会（Nippon Keidanren）施加的巨大压力，让安倍淡化了让公司更有活力、对股东更加积极的承诺。也许安倍晋三意识到，要想让安倍经济学有一战之力，就必须提高首席执行官们的薪水，而与他们过不去只会适得其反。



One reason a Ghosn-like hire might work for Takeda is the wildcard dynamic it tosses into a company almost as old as America. Weber is an outsider to Takeda, making it easier to close businesses, fire workers, and ignore the seniority-based promotion system that restricts the size of a company’s talent pool and, by extension, its profits. Competing in global markets means pulling together an A-team, not a bunch of clock-punchers next in line for a corner office.

武田之所以能雇用戈恩这样的人，原因之一是这给这家几乎与美国一样古老的公司带来了通病。韦伯是武田的局外人，这使得他可以更容易地关闭业务、解雇员工，并无视限制公司人才库规模、进而限制公司利润的论资排辈的晋升制度。在全球市场上竞争意味着要组建一支A-team，而不是一群打卡下班的人。



The hiring of outsiders as CEOs, while common in markets like the United States, is incredibly rare in Japan. In the United States, Yahoo! Inc. recruited Marissa Mayer from Google Inc. and Hewlett-Packard Co. appointed Meg Whitman. While Ford Motor Co.’s choice of former Boeing Co. executive Alan Mulally is among the success stories, there have been failures, including J.C. Penney Co.’s recruitment of Ron Johnson from Apple.

聘用外部人士担任首席执行官在美国等市场很常见，但在日本却非常罕见。在美国，雅虎公司从谷歌公司聘请了玛丽莎-梅耶尔，惠普公司任命了梅格-惠特曼。福特汽车公司选择波音公司前高管艾伦-穆拉利（Alan Mulally）是成功的案例之一，但也有失败的案例，包括 J.C. Penney 公司从苹果公司招聘罗恩-约翰逊（Ron Johnson）。



Of course, success will depend as much on Weber as Takeda’s board. Japan’s more recent experiments with gaijin CEOs went awry. Welsh-born Howard Stringer, for instance, got the top job at Sony in 2005 amid great fanfare. He fired thousands of workers but failed to fix Sony’s notorious “silos problem”—several divisions jealous of each other’s resources, looking in different directions, barely talking to one another, and sapping the company’s once-fabled innovative spirit. In 2012, Stringer stepped down after four straight annual losses.

当然，成功与否既取决于韦伯，也取决于武田的董事会。日本最近对外籍首席执行官的尝试都失败了。例如，出生于威尔士的霍华德-斯金格（Howard Stringer）在 2005 年大张旗鼓地获得了索尼公司的最高职位。他解雇了数千名员工，但却未能解决索尼臭名昭著的 "孤岛问题"--多个部门相互嫉妒对方的资源，各顾各的，几乎互不说话，削弱了公司曾经令人称道的创新精神。2012 年，斯金格在连续四次年度亏损后下台。



Michael Woodford’s experience made for even worse headlines. In April 2011, Olympus president Tsuyoshi Kikukawa thought he’d found the ideal corporate lackey in Woodford, a Briton. He would offer the illusion of outside, international thinking, but be a pushover in the boardroom. Instead, Woodford discovered the camera maker was an Enron-esque mess that had spent 13 years hiding losses that snowballed to at least $1.7 billion. Rather than reward him for trying to right the company, the Olympus board fired Woodford for “cultural insensitivity.”

迈克尔-伍德福德（Michael Woodford）的经历成为了更糟糕的头条新闻。2011 年 4 月，奥林巴斯总裁菊川刚（Tsuyoshi Kikukawa）认为他已经找到了理想的公司走狗--英国人伍德福德。伍德福德是个英国人，他能给人一种国际化思维的错觉，但在董事会上却很难施展拳脚。然而，伍德福德发现这家相机制造商就像安然公司（Enron）一样一团糟，用了 13 年的时间来掩盖至少 17 亿美元的亏损。奥林巴斯董事会非但没有因为伍德福德试图纠正公司的错误而奖励他，反而以 "对文化不敏感 "为由解雇了他。



To succeed, Takeda must embrace change in a survival-of-the-fittest world that’s quickly evolving beyond Japan Inc. If Abe’s exhortations can’t do it, perhaps the private sector can show stuck-in-time vested interests how to escape Galapagos. Japan shows unambiguously that the islands that so beguiled Darwin and changed our understanding of nature are a great place to visit. You just don’t want your economy getting stuck there.

要想取得成功，武田必须在这个优胜劣汰的世界中拥抱变革。如果安倍晋三的劝诫无法奏效，或许私营企业可以告诉那些被时代所困的既得利益者如何逃离加拉帕戈斯。日本清楚地表明，这个让达尔文着迷并改变了我们对自然的认识的岛屿是一个值得一游的好地方。你只是不希望你的经济被困在那里。





Chapter 6

Hello Kitty Isn’t a Foreign Policy

How Amateurish Diplomacy Undermines Japan

第6章 你好凯蒂猫不是外交政策业余外交如何损害日本





In May 2013, Shinzo Abe did a goodwill tour of the tsunami-devastated Tohoku region. He visited local government offices, aid workers, schools, and displaced inhabitants along Japan’s northeastern coastline. Keen on making the most of the trip and buttressing his bona fides as a strong leader, Abe’s advisers added a stop at Matsushima air base. There, Abe would be photographed conferring with senior military brass. It would be photo-opportunity heaven. Little did Abe’s people know it would also precipitate an international incident.

2013 年 5 月，安倍晋三对遭受海啸破坏的东北地区进行了友好访问。他访问了日本东北海岸线上的地方政府办公室、援助人员、学校和流离失所的居民。安倍晋三的顾问们希望最大限度地利用这次访问，巩固他作为一位强有力领导人的良好声誉，因此在松岛空军基地增加了一站。在那里，安倍将被拍到与高级军事将领商谈的照片。这将是拍照机会的天堂。安倍的人不知道这也会引发一场国际事件。



The Matsushima base is home to “Blue Impulse,” Japan’s Air Self-Defense Force’s aerobatic display team. Created in 1958, the squadron is the pride of Japanese military culture and their Kawasaki T-4 training aircraft painted in white-and-blue colors are instantly recognizable throughout the nation. Abe’s aides couldn’t resist having their boss climb into one of the cockpits for the cameras. Unfortunately, the plane was emblazoned with the number “731.”

松岛基地是日本航空自卫队特技飞行表演队 "蓝色冲击 "的所在地。该中队成立于 1958 年，是日本军事文化的骄傲，他们的川崎 T-4 型训练机涂成白蓝相间的颜色，在全国各地一眼就能认出。安倍晋三的助手们忍不住让他们的上司爬进其中一架飞机的驾驶舱，对着镜头拍摄。不幸的是，这架飞机上印有 "731 "的编号。



The Imperial Japanese Army’s Unit 731 tested chemical and biological weapons on human prisoners during the 1937–1945 Sino–Japanese War and World War II. It was located in the city of Harbin, the largest city of Manchukuo, the Japanese puppet state that is now northeast China, and run by General Shiro Ishii. A microbiologist by training, Ishii is often called Japan’s answer to Josef Mengele, the brutal doctor of Auschwitz infamy. Needless to say, Chinese and Korean officials were outraged. Japan insisted it was all an unfortunate coincidence, but no one in Beijing or Seoul bought it. Just 10 days earlier, Abe wore a baseball jersey to an event honoring slugger Hideki Matsui bearing the number “96.” In China and Korea, it was read as a reference to “Article 96,” the clause in Japan’s constitution that spells out the process of revising the pacifist document. Altering it to enable Japan to maintain an offensive military is one of Abe’s biggest priorities.

在 1937-1945 年的中日战争和第二次世界大战期间，日本皇军 731 部队曾对战俘进行生化武器试验。它位于满洲国（即现在的中国东北）最大的城市哈尔滨，由石井四郎将军管理。石井是一名微生物学家，常被称为日本的约瑟夫-门格尔（Josef Mengele），奥斯威辛集中营臭名昭著的残暴医生。毋庸置疑，中国和韩国官员对此感到愤怒。日本坚称这只是一个不幸的巧合，但北京和首尔没人相信。就在 10 天前，安倍晋三穿着一件棒球球衣出席了一个纪念猛男松井秀树的活动，球衣上的数字是 "96"。在中国和韩国，这被解读为是指 "第96条"，即日本宪法中阐明和平主义文件修改过程的条款。修改宪法使日本能够维持一支进攻性军队是安倍的首要任务之一。



“Abe’s Pose Resurrects Horrors of Unit 731,” screamed Korea Joongang Daily’s headline. Chinese cyberspace buzzed about Abe’s latest “numerical provocation.” The episode showed how raw and close to the surface tensions are in North Asia—and how hard feelings over the past could derail Asia’s future. Even something as seemingly innocuous as tourist attractions can raise blood pressures. One generalization that’s safe to make about the Japanese people is their love of World Heritage Sites, both at home and abroad. Walk past any travel agency and you will see reams of banners pitching “UNESCO Tours.” Visit any place that the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization stamps as globally important—Cambodia’s temples at Angkor, Greece’s Acropolis, Jordan’s Petra, Tanzania’s Serengeti, or, of course, Ecuador’s Galapagos Islands—and you will see busloads of Japanese. But national pride has prompted governments in recent decades to win as many UNESCO certifications as possible. In 2013, for example, Mt. Fuji became such a site, while UNESCO put Japanese food on its list of important world cuisines.

韩国《中央日报》的头版头条写道："安倍的姿态复活了 731 部队的恐怖"。中国网络空间对安倍最新的 "数字挑衅 "议论纷纷。这一事件表明，北亚的紧张局势是多么原始和接近表面--对过去的怨恨可能会破坏亚洲的未来。即使是旅游景点这样看似无伤大雅的事情也会让人血压升高。对于日本人来说，有一点可以放心，那就是他们对国内外世界遗产的热爱。走过任何一家旅行社，你都会看到大量宣传 "联合国教科文组织之旅 "的标语。到访任何一个被联合国教育、科学及文化组织认定为具有全球重要意义的地方--柬埔寨的吴哥寺、希腊的雅典卫城、约旦的佩特拉、坦桑尼亚的塞伦盖蒂，当然还有厄瓜多尔的加拉帕戈斯群岛--你都会看到成群结队的日本人。但是，近几十年来，民族自豪感促使各国政府尽可能多地赢得联合国教科文组织的认证。例如，2013 年，富士山成为联合国教科文组织的认证景点，而联合国教科文组织则将日本美食列入世界重要美食名单。



So, in September 2013, when the government said it was requesting that 28 historic sites that formed the nucleus of Japan’s industrialization be recognized by UNESCO, officials in Tokyo expected little flak. However, nearly a dozen of those “Sites of Japan’s Meiji Industrial Revolution,” clustered mostly on the island of Kyushu, served as World War II labor camps for Korean prisoners. It prompted an immediate and fierce rebuke from Seoul. According to Korea Joongang Daily, thousands of Koreans worked as slaves at the sites, which included a Nagasaki shipyard and coal mines and steel mills in Fukuoka. Few Koreans were known to come out alive or healthy.

因此，2013 年 9 月，当日本政府表示要求联合国教科文组织承认构成日本工业化核心的 28 处历史遗迹时，东京的官员们并没有预料到会遭到什么抨击。然而，在这些 "日本明治工业革命遗址 "中，有近十处主要集中在九州岛，曾在二战中作为朝鲜战俘的劳改营。这立即引起了首尔方面的猛烈抨击。据《韩国中央日报》（Korea Joongang Daily）报道，数以千计的朝鲜人在这些地方充当奴隶，其中包括长崎的造船厂、福冈的煤矿和钢铁厂。据了解，几乎没有朝鲜人能够活着或健康地出来。



The dustup is another reminder of how Asia’s past gets in the way of what should be a bright and cooperative future. But it’s also but one small example of how insular and amateurish diplomacy undermines Japan’s designs on playing a key geopolitical role in a world that’s already moving on to China. “What is necessary for Japan’s renewal is a powerful catalyst that will restyle the old Japan and make the ‘new’ Japan even stronger,” Abe told an audience at Guildhall in London on June 19, 2013.

这场风波再次提醒人们，亚洲的过去如何阻碍了本应光明与合作的未来。但这也只是一个小例子，它说明了孤僻和业余的外交是如何破坏日本在一个已经转向中国的世界中扮演关键地缘政治角色的图谋的。"2013年6月19日，安倍晋三在伦敦吉尔德霍尔会议厅对听众说："日本复兴所需的是一种强大的催化剂，它将重塑旧日本，使'新'日本更加强大。



Yet, how possible is that when so much of the old thinking permeates Tokyo, particularly in foreign policy? Never mind World War II; Japan’s Liberal Democratic Party can’t even relegate the nineteenth century to the past. It may be 2013, with the world surrounding this island nation changing at a blistering pace, but Japanese officialdom seems oddly stuck in the late 1800s. Back then, reformers adopted the slogan “rich nation, strong army.” This rabid nationalism culminated, of course, in World War II and a crushing defeat. Fast-forward a hundred years or so. Here is the hauntingly similar motto Abe used to win the premiership in December 2012: “Build a strong and prosperous Japan.” Few can know for sure what’s in Abe’s heart or that of his Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), but such views are emblematic of the rightward lurch in Japanese politics at a time when an ascendant China is challenging Japan’s very relevance in the region. The implications for Asia and Barack Obama’s second presidential term are enormous.

然而，在东京，尤其是在外交政策方面，如此多的旧思想充斥其中，这怎么可能呢？别提第二次世界大战了，日本自民党甚至无法将 19 世纪的历史抛诸脑后。也许现在是 2013 年，这个岛国周围的世界正以迅雷不及掩耳之势发生着变化，但日本官方似乎还奇怪地停留在 19 世纪末。那时，改革者提出了 "富国强兵 "的口号。当然，这种狂热的民族主义最终导致了第二次世界大战的惨败。再往前推一百多年。安倍晋三在 2012 年 12 月赢得首相职位时使用的座右铭与现在极为相似："建设强大繁荣的日本"。很少有人能确定安倍或其领导的自民党的内心想法，但在中国崛起挑战日本在该地区的重要性之际，这种观点是日本政治右倾化的象征。这对亚洲和奥巴马的第二个总统任期影响巨大。





Abe’s nineteenth-century nostalgia has complicated roots that began at his grandfather’s knee. Nobusuke Kishi, the former prime minister who brought the 1964 Olympics to Tokyo, was Abe’s maternal grandfather and, by all appearances, his personal hero. In his 2006 book, Towards a Beautiful Country, Abe writes glowingly of the man who inspired his brand of conservatism. That’s why securing the 2020 Olympics for Tokyo was such a sweet victory for Abe—a family legacy bookend. The 1964 Games confirmed Japan’s phoenix-like rise from defeat in World War II. Its bullet trains, avant-garde stadiums, and neon-lit skyline advertised a country and an economy prepared to take the lead in Asia and indeed the world. Abe is clearly gunning for a similar rebirth so that the world’s attention swings back Tokyo’s way.

安倍的十九世纪怀旧情结源于他外祖父的膝下。将 1964 年奥运会带到东京的前首相岸信介是安倍晋三的外祖父，从表面上看也是他的个人英雄。在 2006 年出版的《迈向美丽的国家》一书中，安倍对这位启发了他的保守主义的人赞不绝口。这就是为什么确保 2020 年东京奥运会对安倍晋三来说是一个甜蜜的胜利--一个家族遗产的完美结局。1964 年的奥运会证实了日本从二战失败中凤凰涅槃般的崛起。它的子弹头列车、前卫的体育场馆和霓虹闪烁的天际线宣传了一个准备在亚洲乃至世界占据领先地位的国家和经济。安倍晋三显然也想实现类似的重生，让世界的目光重新投向东京。



The family also hails from Yamaguchi Prefecture, on the westernmost tip of Japan’s main island, Honshu, and proudly so. There, you will find a small city of immense importance to Abe’s worldview, called Hagi. The white-walled medieval castle town was the stomping ground of the sixteenth-century samurai warlord Motonari Mori, who tried to teach his sons unity by showing them a single arrow could be snapped easily, while three together were hard to break. This local bit of homespun wisdom is the inspiration for the “three arrows” about which global markets are buzzing.

安倍晋三家族也来自日本本州岛最西端的山口县，并以此为荣。在那里，有一座对安倍晋三的世界观具有重要意义的小城，名叫萩。这座白墙黛瓦的中世纪城堡小镇曾是 16 世纪武士军阀毛利元成的活动场所，毛利元成为了教导他的儿子们团结，告诉他们一支箭很容易折断，而三支箭在一起就很难折断。全球市场热议的 "三支箭 "就是受到了这一本土智慧的启发。



To the Abe-Kishi clan, Yamaguchi has an almost spiritual energy coursing through it. It’s a place with a history of deep conservatism, but also a knack for reinvention and reformist zeal. Clans from Nagato, the city of Abe’s birth, were instrumental in the fall of the Tokugawa shogunate, the last feudal government, and the rise of a new imperial one. Abe is deeply proud of Yamaguchi’s propensity for comebacks prior to the start of the Meiji Restoration that marked Japan’s opening to the world and its industrialization. Those powers of reinvention may have driven his grandfather’s redemptive journey from a suspected war criminal to prime minister. Abe’s, too; few would have ever predicted his return for a second chance as prime minister.

对于安倍岸家族来说，山口几乎是一个充满灵性的地方。这是一个有着深厚保守主义历史的地方，同时也是一个善于创新和热衷于改革的地方。安倍晋三的出生地长门市的氏族在德川幕府（最后一个封建政府）的覆灭和新天皇政府的崛起中发挥了重要作用。在标志着日本对外开放和工业化的明治维新开始之前，山口县就有东山再起的倾向，安倍对此深感自豪。他祖父从战犯嫌疑犯到首相的救赎之旅，可能就是在这种重塑能力的推动下完成的。安倍晋三也是如此；很少有人会预料到他重返首相宝座的第二次机会。



Yet it’s the events long before 1964 that fill Abe’s mind. In the mid-1930s, Kishi was a senior administrator in Manchukuo, a key industrial site. He later served in Hideki Tojo’s wartime cabinet overseeing commerce and industry. After Japan’s surrender in 1945, Kishi found himself doing time in Sugamo Prison near Tokyo’s Ikebukuro district amid accusations of exploiting Chinese labor. He was never charged or tried by U.S. Occupation officials as a war criminal, ostensibly for lack of evidence. Once freed, Kishi managed to resurrect his career in ways few peers thought possible, helping to form the LDP on his way to the prime minister’s residence, where he resided from 1957 to 1960. Even so, Kishi’s reputation never shook off the baggage of the past.

然而，安倍晋三满脑子想的却是 1964 年之前发生的事情。20 世纪 30 年代中期，岸信介在重要工业基地满洲国担任高级行政官。后来，他进入东条英机的战时内阁，负责工商业。1945 年日本投降后，岸信介被指控剥削中国劳工，在东京池袋区附近的菅生监狱服刑。由于缺乏证据，美国占领军官员从未将他作为战犯起诉或审判。获得自由后，岸信介以很少有同行认为可能的方式重新开始了他的职业生涯，在进入首相官邸的途中帮助组建了自民党，1957 年至 1960 年他一直居住在首相官邸。即便如此，岸信介的声誉从未摆脱过去的包袱。



In his 1999 Pulitzer Prize–winning occupation history, Embracing Defeat, John Dower called Kishi “brilliant and unscrupulous” as part of his blistering attack on the way U.S. officials carried out the war-crimes trials. His conclusion was that it’s impossible to “defend the American decision to exonerate the emperor of war responsibility and then, in the chill of the Cold War, release and soon afterwards openly embrace accused rightwing war criminals like the later prime minister Kishi Nobusuke.”

在 1999 年获得普利策奖的占领史著作《拥抱战败》中，约翰-道尔（John Dower）称岸信介 "才华横溢、不择手段"，这是他对美国官员进行战争罪审判的方式进行猛烈抨击的一部分。他的结论是，"美国决定免除天皇的战争责任，然后在冷战的寒流中释放并在不久之后公开拥抱被指控的右翼战犯，如后来的首相岸信介，为这一决定辩护是不可能的"。



For Abe, Kishi personified the humiliation of defeat and the postwar order: the emperor stripped of god status, a constitution written by the United States, and a nation unable to have conventional military forces. Anger over this “victor’s justice,” in the parlance of Japan’s right wing, is what informed Abe’s first stint as prime minister from 2006 to 2007. The concern in Asia has been that as Abe feels more secure in his premiership, he would shift anew to his obsession with a “Beautiful Japan.” That’s the catchall phrase that Abe trotted out early in his first stint as prime minister in 2006. The euphemism encompasses a wide range of controversial policies—from downplaying or denying Japan’s wartime atrocities to scrubbing textbooks of embarrassing history and inserting more patriotism into school curriculums to rewriting Japan’s pacifist postwar constitution to flexing muscles in Asia. It also encompasses official visits to Tokyo’s Yasukuni Shrine, which honors several convicted war criminals along with Japan’s war dead, that cheer local nationalists and enrage an Asia that believes the government has never properly atoned for its wartime aggression.

对安倍而言，岸信介是战败和战后秩序屈辱的化身：天皇被剥夺了神的地位，宪法由美国制定，国家无法拥有常规军事力量。日本右翼对这种 "胜利者的正义 "感到愤怒，这也是安倍晋三 2006 年至 2007 年首次担任首相的原因。亚洲人担心的是，随着安倍在首相位置上感到更有安全感，他将重新转向对 "美丽日本 "的痴迷。这是安倍在 2006 年首次担任首相之初提出的一个总括性词语。这一委婉语涵盖了一系列颇具争议的政策--从淡化或否认日本战时的暴行，到在教科书中删除令人尴尬的历史，在学校课程中加入更多爱国主义内容，到重写日本战后和平主义宪法，再到在亚洲大展拳脚。这还包括正式参拜东京的靖国神社，该神社供奉着几名被定罪的战犯和日本战死者，这让当地的民族主义者欢欣鼓舞，同时也激怒了认为日本政府从未为其战时侵略行为适当赎罪的亚洲人。



It’s hard to exaggerate how devastated the political establishment in Tokyo was to see China’s economy surpass Japan’s in 2010. That Japan shares the same credit rating as China is a deeply sore point for the conservative lawmakers who make up Abe’s LDP. Abe is anxious to restore the pride drained by two decades of economic stagnation, and in the postwar period before that. Visiting Washington in February 2013, he pledged to “bring back a strong Japan.” He went even further in a speech to the U.S. foreign-policy establishment: “Japan is not, and will never be, a tier-two country,” he declared ominously.

2010 年，中国的经济总量超过了日本，这对东京政界的打击之大可想而知。日本的信用等级与中国相同，这让组成安倍晋三自民党的保守派议员们深感痛心。安倍晋三急于恢复二十年经济停滞以及之前战后时期耗尽的自豪感。2013 年 2 月访问华盛顿时，他承诺要 "带回一个强大的日本"。他在对美国外交政策机构的演讲中更进一步："他不祥地宣称："日本现在不是，将来也不会是一个二线国家。



In the spirit of harmony, Japanese place great emphasis on deciphering the difference between honne, the officially stated position one feels obliged to state publicly, and tatemae, one’s true opinion. Figuring out which of these default positions you are getting in a conversation can be as challenging as it is maddening. For much of 2013, Japan observers bought into the honne coming from Abe’s cabinet. Abe dropped few hints that he would go to Yasukuni, focusing instead on his electoral mandate to end deflation. Yet that changed on December 26, 2013, the one-year anniversary of his second premiership, when Abe betrayed his true intensions—his tatemae. On a crisp Thursday morning, with television-news helicopters circling overhead to air the event live, a tuxedo-clad Abe went to Yasukuni in defiance of global opinion. Afterward, Abe tried to finesse the gesture by declaring, “Japan must never wage war again. This is my conviction based on severe remorse for the past. It is not my intention at all to hurt the feelings of the Chinese and Korean people.”

本着和睦相处的精神，日本人非常重视分辨 "honne "和 "tatemae "之间的区别。"honne "是一个人认为有义务公开表明的正式立场，而 "tatemae "则是一个人的真实想法。要在对话中弄清自己的默认立场，既充满挑战，又令人抓狂。在 2013 年的大部分时间里，日本观察家们对安倍内阁的 "本名 "深信不疑。安倍几乎没有暗示他会去靖国参拜，而是专注于结束通货紧缩的选举任务。然而，2013 年 12 月 26 日，也就是安倍晋三就任第二任首相一周年之际，情况发生了变化。在一个清爽的周四上午，电视新闻直升机在头顶盘旋，直播这一事件，身着燕尾服的安倍无视全球舆论，前往靖国参拜。事后，安倍试图以 "日本绝不能再发动战争 "来修饰自己的姿态。这是我基于对过去严重悔恨的信念。我完全无意伤害中国和韩国人民的感情"。



But hurt Asia’s feelings is exactly what Abe’s shortsighted action did, provoking immediate and strong condemnation from China’s state media as Chinese consumers took to social media to call for a boycott of Japanese goods. “Japan has no future if it continues on its revisionist path,” People’s Daily, the Communist Party mouthpiece, said in a December 27, 2013, editorial. The Global Times demanded that Abe and senior Japanese officials who visited Yasukuni be barred from the mainland. The China Daily labeled the pilgrimage an “intolerable insult” and urged Beijing to reconsider its relationship with Japan on everything from trade and security to diplomacy.

但安倍的短视行为恰恰伤害了亚洲的感情，立即引起了中国国家媒体的强烈谴责，中国消费者在社交媒体上呼吁抵制日货。"中共喉舌《人民日报》在 2013 年 12 月 27 日的社论中说："日本如果继续走修正主义道路，就没有前途。环球时报》要求禁止安倍和参拜靖国神社的日本高级官员进入大陆。中国日报》将安倍晋三参拜靖国神社称为 "不可容忍的侮辱"，并敦促北京重新考虑与日本在贸易、安全和外交等各方面的关系。



In Seoul, giant protests besieged the Japanese embassy. Korean Culture Minister Yoo Jin-ryong called Abe’s move “deplorable” as Park Geun-hye’s government scrapped plans for a series of defense meetings that held the promise of cooperation to rein in North Korea. In a December 27, 2013, editorial, Chosun Ilbo said Abe “crossed the final line” and urged Seoul to devise “completely new ways” to deal with Tokyo. Dong-A Ilbo characterized the visit as a “serious act of provocation” to Asians who suffered from Japanese imperialism.

在首尔，巨大的抗议声浪包围了日本大使馆。韩国文化部长柳真龙称安倍此举 "令人遗憾"，因为朴槿惠政府取消了一系列防务会议计划，而这些会议曾承诺合作遏制朝鲜。朝鲜日报》在2013年12月27日的社论中称安倍 "越过了最后底线"，并敦促首尔制定 "全新的方式 "与东京打交道。东亚日报》称安倍此访是对饱受日本帝国主义之苦的亚洲人的 "严重挑衅"。



For Asia, Yasukuni is about as charged an issue as there is, and the divide between Japan’s official view of politicians paying respects at Yasukuni Shrine and the rest of the region continues to widen. The shrine honors the military’s dead, including 14 World War II leaders convicted as class-A war criminals such as Hideki Tojo, who in addition to serving as prime minister was war minister in the 1940s.

对亚洲来说，靖国问题是一个尖锐的问题，日本官方对政客参拜靖国神社的看法与该地区其他国家之间的分歧在继续扩大。靖国神社供奉着军队的阵亡将士，其中包括 14 名被判定为甲级战犯的二战领导人，如东条英机。



Until Abe’s December 2013 visit, the spin in Tokyo, the honne, was about Abe’s restraint—how he had kept his eyes on the economy and his nationalist tendencies in check. In September 2006, he arrived in office energized to revise past apologies for wartime offenses and alter the U.S.-imposed pacifist constitution, so Japan could more freely deploy military assets. During that abbreviated 12-month term, Abe challenged Japan’s 1993 apology by then–Chief Cabinet Secretary Yohei Kono for the military’s use of foreign women as sex slaves before and during World War II and legislated making patriotism a key goal of education. He also passed a measure to allow for constitutional change. But in the first 12 months of his current premiership, Abe appeared to leave these aspirations on the backburner.

在安倍于2013年12月访问日本之前，东京都内对安倍的评价一直是 "克制"--他如何关注经济，如何控制民族主义倾向。2006年9月，安倍晋三上任后，积极修改过去对战时罪行的道歉，并修改美国强加的和平主义宪法，使日本可以更自由地部署军事资产。在这短暂的 12 个月任期内，安倍对 1993 年时任内阁官房长官河野洋平就二战前和二战期间军方利用外国妇女充当性奴隶一事做出的道歉提出质疑，并立法将爱国主义作为教育的主要目标。他还通过了一项允许修改宪法的措施。但在本届首相任期的前 12 个月，安倍似乎将这些愿望搁置一旁。



Turns out, it was all a head fake, and a terribly timed one. The six weeks prior to Abe’s provocation were unusually good ones for Japan’s normally ham-handed diplomacy. The nation was riding a wave of global support following a series of missteps by China. One came in mid-November 2013, when China made an absurdly chintzy aid offering to typhoon-devastated Philippines, one that dented its “soft power” in Asia. Japan, by contrast, led international relief efforts, showering the Philippines with tens of millions of dollars of cash, supplies, and a small army of medical personnel.

事实证明，这一切都是假的，而且时机不对。在安倍挑衅之前的六周，对于日本通常笨手笨脚的外交来说是异常美好的六周。在中国的一系列失误之后，日本正处于全球支持的浪潮之中。其中之一发生在 2013 年 11 月中旬，当时中国向遭受台风袭击的菲律宾提供了荒唐而吝啬的援助，削弱了其在亚洲的 "软实力"。相比之下，日本领导了国际救援行动，向菲律宾提供了数千万美元的现金、物资和一支医疗队。



Yet China’s biggest blunder was in late November 2013, when Beijing unilaterally declared a wide “air-defense identification zone” across the East China Sea, including over various islands and rocks claimed by Japan and Korea. The confrontational move revived fears of China as a bullying hegemon, gave Japan and Korea something on which to agree, and allowed Abe look downright statesman-like. That Japan had regained some of the moral high ground in Asia that Abe so coveted was apparent during a December 13–14, 2013, summit with southeast Asian leaders in Tokyo. There, Abe unveiled plans to lavish some $20 billion in investment on the region and pitched Japan as an alternative to Beijing’s bullying ways. With one impetuous visit to a Tokyo shrine, though, Abe squandered all the goodwill Japan had amassed. That may go for Washington, too. No relationship is more vital to Abe than that with the United States, and yet his Yasukuni jaunt irked the White House. Jen Psaki, a State Department spokeswoman, said the United States was “disappointed that Japan’s leadership has taken an action that will exacerbate tensions with Japan’s neighbors,” echoing comments from Ambassador Caroline Kennedy. Abe’s act also put a damper on what otherwise would have been a moment of joint celebration in Washington and Tokyo: a deal to end a tussle over the location of a Marine base on the island of Okinawa.

然而，中国最大的失误是在 2013 年 11 月底，当时北京单方面宣布在东海划出一个宽阔的 "防空识别区"，包括日本和韩国声称拥有主权的多个岛屿和岩石。这一对抗性举动重新唤起了人们对中国恃强凌弱的恐惧，让日本和韩国有了可以达成一致的理由，也让安倍看起来像个彻头彻尾的政治家。2013 年 12 月 13 日至 14 日，日本与东南亚领导人在东京举行峰会，会上安倍晋三觊觎的亚洲道德制高点被重新夺回。在这次峰会上，安倍晋三公布了向该地区投资约 200 亿美元的计划，并将日本塑造成北京霸道作风的替代者。然而，安倍晋三对东京神社的一次急躁参拜，让日本积累的所有善意化为乌有。华盛顿可能也会如此。对安倍来说，最重要的关系莫过于与美国的关系，然而他的靖国之行却惹恼了白宫。美国国务院发言人珍-普萨基（Jen Psaki）说，美国 "对日本领导人采取的将加剧与日本邻国紧张关系的行动感到失望"，这与卡罗琳-肯尼迪（Caroline Kennedy）大使的评论如出一辙。安倍的这一举动还使华盛顿和东京本应共同庆祝的时刻受到影响：双方就结束冲绳岛海军陆战队基地选址问题的争论达成了协议。



In retrospect, it’s clear that Abe’s deputy prime minister, Taro Aso, was setting the stage for his boss with his own visit two months earlier. Accompanied by three other cabinet members, and about 160 lawmakers, Aso went to Yasukuni on October 18, 2013, during Japan’s annual autumn festival. That visit, along with Abe’s decision to make a personal $500 offering to the Shinto shrine, prompted fast and furious reactions. The People’s Daily in China sniffed that Abe’s offering was no different from visiting in person.

现在回想起来，安倍的副首相麻生太郎在两个月前的参拜显然是在为他的上司做铺垫。2013 年 10 月 18 日，麻生在其他三名内阁成员和大约 160 名议员的陪同下，在日本一年一度的秋季大祭期间前往靖国参拜。这次参拜以及安倍晋三向神社供奉 500 美元祭品的决定引起了迅速而激烈的反应。中国的《人民日报》认为，安倍的供奉与亲自参拜无异。



“The Yasukuni shrine is a Japanese militarism symbol,” Hua Chunying, China’s Foreign Ministry spokeswoman, said on October 18, 2013. Visits to the shrine are “a blatant attempt to whitewash the Japanese military’s history of aggression.”

"2013年10月18日，中国外交部发言人华春莹表示："靖国神社是日本军国主义的象征。参拜靖国神社是 "公然企图粉饰日本军国主义侵略历史"。



Korean officials were no less apoplectic. Yet even before this most recent Yasukuni dustup, President Park said she wouldn’t meet with Abe unless his grasp of history improved. She demonstrated her resolve at a testy meeting with U.S. Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel in Seoul in September. When Hagel encouraged Park to get along better with Tokyo, Park, according to a November 24, 2013, New York Times report, shot back: “If Germany had continued to say things that inflicted pain, while acting as if all was well, would European integration have been possible? I think the answer is no.” Park reportedly lectured Hagel about Japan’s “total absence of sincerity.”

韩国官员也同样感到愤怒。然而，就在最近的靖国之争之前，朴槿惠总统就曾表示，除非安倍对历史的掌握有所改进，否则她不会与安倍会面。今年 9 月，她在首尔与美国国防部长查克-哈格尔（Chuck Hagel）的一次激烈会谈中表明了自己的决心。据《纽约时报》2013 年 11 月 24 日报道，当哈格尔鼓励朴槿惠与东京搞好关系时，朴槿惠回击道："如果德国继续说一些让人痛苦的话，却表现得好像一切都很好，欧洲一体化还可能实现吗？我认为答案是否定的。"据报道，朴槿惠教训哈格尔说，日本 "完全没有诚意"。



Park’s steeliness is partly about family baggage. In 1965, her father, former dictator Park Chung-hee, signed a treaty normalizing relations with Japan on terms many Koreans believe went too easy on Tokyo. Lashing out at Japan helps buttress Park’s bona fides with conservatives and rally her 50 million people. But the events of World War II are very close to the bone for many Koreans. That explains why the “731” jet photo enraged the nation. It also explains why comments from Osaka Mayor Toru Hashimoto—a man few outside Japan had ever heard of before—so enraged Park’s nation.

朴槿惠的强硬部分与家庭包袱有关。1965 年，她的父亲、前独裁者朴正熙签署了一项与日本关系正常化的条约，许多韩国人认为该条约对东京过于宽容。抨击日本有助于巩固朴槿惠在保守派心目中的形象，并团结她的 5000 万人民。但是，二战事件对许多韩国人来说都是刻骨铭心的。这就解释了为什么 "731 "喷气式飞机的照片会激怒全国人民。这也解释了为什么大阪市长桥本彻（Toru Hashimoto）的言论激怒了朴槿惠的国民--在日本以外，很少有人听说过这个人。



In May 2013, Hashimoto shocked the world when he said that “anyone could understand” brothels—of the kind for which Japan is infamous during World War II—were needed for soldiers facing battle. He later tried his hand at damage control at a Tokyo press conference, saying that holding sex slaves was “inexcusable” and Japan should express a “heartfelt apology” to victims. But then he doubled down, complaining that Japan shouldn’t be singled out because other countries’ militaries had also violated women’s rights. In July, Aso again dragged Japan back into the weeds of World War II, when he was quoted in the Tokyo Shimbun as telling a seminar in Tokyo that Abe’s government, which wants to overhaul the pacifist constitution, should learn from Germany’s Weimar Constitution, which he said was amended quietly, leading to the rise of the Nazis. Neither the Chinese nor the Koreans were amused.

2013 年 5 月，桥本说 "任何人都能理解 "妓院是为面临战争的士兵所需要的，日本在二战期间就是以妓院而臭名昭著的。随后，他在东京的一次新闻发布会上试图进行损害控制，称关押性奴隶是 "不可原谅的"，日本应该向受害者表示 "由衷的歉意"。但随后他又变本加厉，抱怨说其他国家的军队也侵犯了妇女的权利，所以日本不应该被单独挑出来。今年 7 月，麻生再次将日本拖入二战的泥沼，《东京新闻》援引他在东京一个研讨会上的发言称，安倍政府希望全面修改和平主义宪法，应该向德国的魏玛宪法学习，他说魏玛宪法的悄悄修改导致了纳粹的崛起。中国人和韩国人都不以为然。



“It’s Abe’s revisionism that is the crux of the problem,” said Rikki Kersten, a politics professor at the Australian National University in Canberra.

"堪培拉澳大利亚国立大学政治学教授里基-克斯滕（Rikki Kersten）说："安倍的修正主义才是问题的症结所在。



By questioning Japan’s guilt for war crimes in WWII and playing word games with volatile concepts such as “aggression,” Abe is cancelling out more than 60 years of Japan’s peaceful, positive contribution to the international community. Instead, revisionism puts Japan squarely back into the frame of WWII and evokes negative and suspicious responses from Japan’s neighbors who were Japan’s victims in that conflict.

安倍质疑日本在二战中犯有战争罪，并用 "侵略 "等不稳定的概念玩文字游戏，这是在抹杀日本 60 多年来对国际社会做出的和平、积极贡献。相反，修正主义使日本完全回到了二战的框架中，并引起了日本邻国的消极和怀疑，而这些邻国正是日本在二战中的受害者。





Even some of Japan’s domestic rhetoric feels a bit too Gestapoesque for comfort as senior government officials suggested those protesting the secrecy bill are unpatriotic. No less than Shigeru Ishiba, the LDP’s secretary-general, said demonstrating against the legislation was akin to a “terrorist act,” a comment he later tried to retract amid public anger. But then, is it appropriate for a democracy to essentially make a secret, well, secret and to do so largely in secrecy?

甚至日本国内的一些言论也让人感觉有点盖世太保的味道，因为高级政府官员暗示那些抗议保密法案的人是不爱国的。自民党秘书长石破茂（Shigeru Ishiba）就曾表示，示威抗议该法案无异于 "恐怖主义行为"，后来在公众的愤怒声中，他试图收回这一言论。但是，一个民主国家将一个秘密变成秘密，而且主要是在秘密的情况下进行，这样做合适吗？



“Welcome to the new Dark Ages of Japan, brought to you by Prime Minister Abe Shinzo’s Liberal Democratic Party” and his coalition partners, wrote Tokyo Vice author Jake Adelstein, who also runs the Japan Subculture Research Center, in a November 30 Japan Times op-ed. Thanks to the state secrets law, “Japan’s press freedom ranking is expected to sink to nearly Uzbekistan or China levels. Welcome to the land of the setting sun. Let’s see how much darker it will get.”

"东京副报》作者、日本亚文化研究中心（Japan Subculture Research Center）杰克-阿德尔斯坦（Jake Adelstein）在 11 月 30 日的《日本时报》专栏文章中写道："欢迎来到首相安倍晋三的自民党及其联盟伙伴带来的日本新黑暗时代。得益于国家机密法，"日本的新闻自由排名预计将下降到接近乌兹别克斯坦或中国的水平。欢迎来到夕阳之国。让我们看看它会变得多么黑暗吧。



This isn’t as hyperbolic as it sounds. Japan’s press freedom index was in freefall even before Abe’s December 2012 return to the premiership. In 2013 alone, its standing dropped a precipitous 31 places from 2012, to a new low of 53 out of 179 countries, according to Reporters Without Borders. The main culprit was weak reporting on radiation risks at Fukushima, something that’s sure to get even worse as incentives for media self-censorship increase.

这并不像听起来那么夸张。早在安倍于2012年12月重返首相宝座之前，日本的新闻自由指数就已一落千丈。根据无国界记者组织的数据，仅在2013年，日本的新闻自由指数就比2012年骤降了31位，在179个国家中跌至53位的新低。罪魁祸首是对福岛辐射风险的报道不力，而随着媒体自我审查动机的增强，这种情况肯定会变得更糟。



The secrecy bill, Adelstein pointed out, has been compared to Japan’s pre–World War II Peace Preservation Law, which gave the government wide latitude to arrest and jail any individual out of step with its policies and ideas. This, from a political party with a disturbing track record of cover-ups: the Minamata mercury-poisoning episode of the 1960s; the HIV-tainted blood scandal in the 1980s; the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry’s heavy-handed efforts to manipulate nuclear-safety problems at Fukushima before and after 3/11; and now this.

阿德尔斯坦指出，该保密法案与日本二战前的《和平保护法》相提并论，后者赋予了政府广泛的自由，可以逮捕和监禁任何与其政策和理念不一致的个人。而这个政党却有着令人不安的掩盖事实的记录：20 世纪 60 年代的水俣汞中毒事件；20 世纪 80 年代的艾滋病毒血液丑闻；经济产业省在 3/11 事件前后操纵福岛核安全问题的高压手段；以及现在的这一切。



“How can the government respond to growing demands for transparency from a public outraged by the consequences of the Fukushima nuclear accident if it enacts a law that gives it a free hand to classify any information considered too sensitive as a ‘state secret’?” Reporters Without Borders said in a November 27, 2013, statement.

"如果政府颁布一项法律，允许它随意将任何被认为过于敏感的信息归类为'国家机密'，那么它又如何回应公众对福岛核事故后果日益增长的透明度要求呢？无国界记者组织在2013年11月27日的一份声明中说。



By imposing heavy penalties on those who obtain classified information and then publish it, Parliament is making investigative journalism illegal, and is trampling on the fundamental principles of the confidentiality of journalists’ sources and public interest.

议会对那些获取机密信息并将其公布于众的人处以重罚，这是将调查性新闻非法化，是对记者消息来源保密和公共利益基本原则的践踏。





Noriko Hama, an economics professor at Doshisha University in Kyoto, likened Tokyo’s secrecy drama to an episode of the popular 1980s BBC sitcom Yes, Minister. In it, a bigwig from a fictitious branch of the British government opining on the public’s right to know declared: “He that would keep a secret must keep it a secret that he hath a secret to keep.” To Hama, this axiom aptly explains the mind-set of Abe’s LDP.

京都同志社大学（Doshisha University）经济学教授Noriko Hama将东京的保密剧比作20世纪80年代英国广播公司（BBC）流行的情景喜剧《是的，部长》（Yes, Minister）中的一集。在该剧中，英国政府一个虚构部门的一位大人物在就公众知情权发表意见时宣称："要想保守秘密，就必须将其保密："要保守秘密的人，必须保守他有秘密要保守的秘密"。在哈马看来，这句公理恰如其分地解释了安倍的自民党的心态。



Japan’s government, as I mentioned earlier, is one run mostly by nameless, faceless career bureaucrats building their own fiefdoms and power structures. This arrangement already leaves the government notoriously opaque. At best, the secrets bill means even less transparency. At worst, it could nudge Japan back in the direction of the prewar period when draconian restrictions on speech enabled generals to pull Japan into war.

正如我前面提到的，日本政府主要由无名无脸的职业官僚管理，他们建立了自己的领地和权力结构。这种安排已经使政府的不透明声名狼藉。在最好的情况下，保密法案意味着更低的透明度。在最坏的情况下，它可能会使日本回到战前时期，当时对言论的严格限制使将军们得以将日本拖入战争。



“This may not quite take Japan back to wartime days, but way too close for comfort,” said Temple’s Jeff Kingston. “The absence of an oversight mechanism to review classification of special secrets is a blank check for bureaucrats to cover up inconvenient documents and their own misdeeds.”

"坦普尔大学的杰夫-金斯顿（Jeff Kingston）说："这可能不会让日本回到战时，但也太接近了。"缺乏审查特殊机密分类的监督机制，就等于给官僚们开了一张空白支票，让他们可以掩盖不方便的文件和自己的不当行为"。



Asked whether it’s fair to compare the secrecy act to the George W. Bush–Dick Cheney power grab that was the Patriot Act, Kingston said:

当被问及将保密法与小布什-迪克-切尼夺权的《爱国者法案》相比是否公平时，金斯顿说：



It’s just as scary and an extremely disturbing development that runs counter to global trend towards greater transparency. This bill will foster a cocoon of impunity that is always and everywhere an anathema to good governance and democracy. Strong public opposition is due to citizens knowing all too well that officials operating in secrecy often act against the public interest and their right to know. It will send a shot over the bow of mass media and have a chilling effect on reporting due to risks of imprisonment.

这同样可怕，而且是一个极其令人不安的事态发展，与提高透明度的全球趋势背道而驰。该法案将助长有罪不罚的弊端，而这种弊端无论何时何地都是善治和民主的大忌。公众之所以强烈反对，是因为公民非常清楚，秘密行事的官员往往会违背公众利益和知情权。这将给大众传媒一记重击，并由于监禁的风险而对报道产生寒蝉效应。





Legal scholar Colin Jones of Doshisha Law School in Kyoto put it this way:

京都同志社法学院的法律学者科林-琼斯这样说道：



The Patriot Act was more about surveillance and law enforcement techniques, whereas the secrecy act is about secrecy itself, so I am not sure I would call it a mini–Patriot Act. What is driving this so soon after an election when it was barely mentioned is a mystery; I suspect that there is U.S. pressure behind it, but also Edward Snowden may have been a wake-up call. The urgency with which it is being brought about is certainly disturbing. Granted, their government side may have a point—that they do not have anything like an “espionage act” and they’ve been trying to pass one for a while. At the same time, I think that the vagueness of the act reflects a basic theme of Japanese governance, which is “I work for the government, therefore I know more than you, therefore you should do what I say.” It helps them if the “I know more than you” part is institutionalized.

爱国者法案》更多涉及的是监视和执法技术，而保密法案涉及的是保密本身，因此我不确定是否可以称其为迷你版《爱国者法案》。大选后不久，保密法几乎未被提及，是什么在推动保密法的出台，这是一个谜；我怀疑背后有美国的压力，但爱德华-斯诺登（Edward Snowden）也可能是一个警钟。此事的紧迫性无疑令人不安。当然，他们的政府方面可能有自己的观点--他们没有类似于 "间谍法 "的法案，而且他们一直在试图通过一项法案。同时，我认为该法案的模糊性反映了日本治理的一个基本主题，即 "我为政府工作，因此我比你们知道得更多，所以你们应该听我的话"。如果将 "我比你们更懂 "这一点制度化，对他们会有帮助。





Back in power again, Abe is one of the three most important politicians in Japan—the others are Shintaro Ishihara, 81, and Hashimoto, 44. In a striking bit of generational serendipity, both men largely agree on where to take their nation. It’s too bad that, like Abe, they have the wrong direction in mind. They want to take Japan inward, not outward into a dynamic global environment that is rife with opportunities.

再次掌权的安倍晋三是日本最重要的三位政治家之一，其他两位分别是 81 岁的石原慎太郎和 44 岁的桥本环奈。这两个人在带领国家走向何方的问题上基本达成了一致，这是一个惊人的代际偶然性。可惜的是，他们和安倍一样，都想错了方向。他们想把日本带向内，而不是带向充满机遇、充满活力的全球环境。



At 59, Abe straddles the generations between Ishihara and Hashimoto. All three are hell-bent on drawing a nationalistic line in the sand between Japan and the rest of Asia. Their views aren’t in sync on every challenge facing Japan. Where their ideologies overlap is a more confrontational stance in a region where China is overshadowing Japan. Many Japanese support this pivot to the right. China, let’s face it, hasn’t distinguished itself as a reasonable stakeholder in the so-called Pacific Century. Its territorial claims to a bewildering number of islands, atolls, and rocks in the sea are antagonizing Filipinos, Koreans, Taiwanese, and Vietnamese.

59 岁的安倍跨越了石原和桥本之间的两代人。三人都一心想在日本和亚洲其他国家之间划出一条民族主义的界线。在日本面临的所有挑战上，他们的观点并不一致。他们意识形态的重合之处在于，在一个中国的影响力已经超越日本的地区，他们采取了更具对抗性的立场。许多日本人支持向右转。让我们面对现实吧，中国在所谓的太平洋世纪中并没有成为一个合理的利益相关者。它对海中数量惊人的岛屿、环礁和岩石提出领土要求，这让菲律宾人、韩国人、台湾人和越南人感到不满。



Japan is anxious to recover the clout drained by 20-plus years of economic stagnation. It irks Japan that President Obama, UK Prime Minister David Cameron, or Brazil’s President Dilma Rousseff would dare set foot in Asia without visiting Tokyo. Or that Japanization has become a catchphrase among economists warning about the evils of falling prices and political gridlock.

日本急于恢复因 20 多年经济停滞而丧失的影响力。奥巴马总统、英国首相戴维-卡梅伦或巴西总统迪尔玛-罗塞夫胆敢在未访问东京的情况下踏足亚洲，这令日本感到恼火。日本化 "也成为经济学家警告物价下跌和政治僵局弊端的口头禅。



It’s true, too, that Japan doesn’t get enough attention for what it does right: industrial quality that ranks among the best anywhere; negligible crime; universal literacy; an enviable environmental record; one of the narrowest rich–poor divides; generous aid programs for developing nations; one of the longest life spans; and a commitment to world peace.

事实也是如此，日本做得对的地方没有得到足够的关注：工业质量位居世界前列；犯罪率微乎其微；普及识字率；令人羡慕的环境记录；贫富差距最小的国家之一；对发展中国家慷慨的援助计划；寿命最长的国家之一；以及对世界和平的承诺。



But the answer for Japan isn’t to do away with this last attribute. It isn’t to ramp up its military or pursue a more muscular and unilateralist foreign policy. That, remember, was Abe’s undoing when he first occupied the prime minister’s residence. His predecessor Junichiro Koizumi fleshed out a plan to revitalize Japan’s economy and politics and then entrusted it to Abe, who promptly put that plan in his desk drawer and opted for creating a “Beautiful Japan.” It meant revamping the education system to encourage nationalism, upgrading the defense agency to ministry status, and myriad statements and actions that annoyed China and Korea. Now that he’s back in power, Abe has a second shot at doing all of this and then some.

但日本的答案并不是要摒弃这最后一个特征。它不是要加强军事力量，也不是要奉行更加强硬和单边主义的外交政策。要知道，这正是安倍第一次担任首相时的败笔。他的前任小泉纯一郎制定了一项振兴日本经济和政治的计划，然后交给了安倍。这意味着改革教育系统以鼓励民族主义，将防卫厅升格为部级，以及无数惹恼中国和韩国的言论和行动。现在，安倍重新掌权，他有机会再次实现这些目标。



Under Abe, Japan has become an unlikely spoiler in Obama’s desire for a united front to denuclearize the Korean Peninsula. Traditionally, China has played this irksome role. The six-party talks over North Korea’s nuclear program—suspended since 2009—never got anywhere largely because China refused to put the screws on its ally. No matter how many missiles the Kim Dynasty fired off, how many nuclear tests it conducted, or how many North Koreans starved or ended up in prison camps, China remained convinced that the alternative of a possible regime collapse was worse.

在安倍的领导下，日本已成为奥巴马希望朝鲜半岛无核化统一战线的一个不太可能的破坏者。传统上，中国一直扮演着这个令人讨厌的角色。关于朝鲜核计划的六方会谈自 2009 年起暂停，之所以没有取得任何进展，主要是因为中国拒绝对其盟友施加压力。无论金氏王朝发射了多少枚导弹，进行了多少次核试验，或有多少朝鲜人挨饿或被关进集中营，中国始终坚信，朝鲜政权可能垮台的另一种选择更为糟糕。



Yet even the Chinese are now fed up with the antics of North Korean leader Kim Jong-un. Officials in Beijing have openly chastised the North for its provocative behavior and have supported United Nations sanctions against the country. At their one-on-one California summit in June 2013, Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping found more common ground on the issue than ever before. Most dramatically, China Construction Bank Corp. ended business with North Korean lenders Korea Kwangson Banking Corp. and Golden Triangle Bank—a slap across the face for strapped Pyongyang.

然而，就连中国人现在也对朝鲜领导人金正恩的滑稽行为感到厌烦。北京官员公开谴责朝鲜的挑衅行为，并支持联合国对朝鲜实施制裁。在 2013 年 6 月的加州一对一峰会上，奥巴马和中国国家主席习近平在这一问题上找到了前所未有的共同点。最引人注目的是，中国建设银行终止了与朝鲜贷款机构朝鲜光鲜银行（Korea Kwangson Banking Corp.



Kim’s government has responded with transparent diplomatic ploys, first seeking talks with South Korea—most likely to satisfy Chinese demands—and then with the United States. As Bradley Martin, author of the book Under the Loving Care of the Fatherly Leader, said: “I’d be very surprised if this were anything but the usual divide-and-conquer tactics.” Officials in Seoul and Washington have displayed admirable unity and discipline. For months, they have treated the erratic Kim with benign neglect, refusing to react to his every threat and each unhinged comment by government mouthpiece Korean Central News Agency. The line is consistent: The outside world will not engage with the North until it does something meaningful to halt its nuclear program and returns to talks with denuclearization as the goal.

金正恩政府采取了透明的外交策略，先是寻求与韩国会谈--这很可能是为了满足中国的要求，然后是与美国会谈。正如《在父亲般的领袖的关爱下》一书的作者布拉德利-马丁（Bradley Martin）所言："如果这不是通常的分而治之的策略，我会感到非常惊讶"。首尔和华盛顿的官员表现出了令人钦佩的团结和纪律。几个月来，他们一直以善意的忽视态度对待反复无常的金正恩，拒绝对他的每一次威胁和政府喉舌朝鲜中央通讯社的每一次失态言论做出反应。他们的立场是一致的：在朝鲜做出有意义的举动停止核计划并重返以无核化为目标的会谈之前，外部世界不会与朝鲜接触。



With both China and Russia—which has its own differences with the Americans over Syria—echoing the same line, Kim faces a narrowing set of options. Yet now, when presenting a united front is more critical than ever, Shinzo Abe threatens to go rogue.

由于中国和俄罗斯（在叙利亚问题上与美国存在分歧）都在重复同样的路线，金正恩面临的选择越来越少。然而现在，在比以往任何时候都更需要统一战线的时候，安倍晋三却威胁要铤而走险。



In May 2013, Abe sent a top aide, Isao Iijima, to Pyongyang for an unannounced four-day trip to meet senior North Korean officials. Iijima hoped to make progress on the issue of Japanese citizens abducted by North Korea years ago, and possibly to lay the groundwork for a summit meeting between Abe and Kim. Since then, Japanese officials have hinted that Japan may resume bilateral talks with the North. Abe’s government reportedly plans to elevate a specialist on the abduction issue to the top bureaucratic post in the Foreign Ministry.

2013 年 5 月，安倍派遣高级助手饭岛勲（Isao Iijima）前往平壤，与朝鲜高级官员进行了为期四天的秘密会谈。饭岛希望在多年前被朝鲜绑架的日本公民问题上取得进展，并可能为安倍与金正恩的首脑会谈奠定基础。此后，日本官员暗示日本可能恢复与朝鲜的双边会谈。据报道，安倍政府计划将一名绑架问题专家提升为外务省最高官职。



“It’s a very amateurish kind of diplomacy,” said Robert Dujarric of Temple University. “Japan is going to get very little out of it, and it won’t strengthen Japan’s global standing.”

"天普大学的罗伯特-杜贾里克（Robert Dujarric）说："这是一种非常业余的外交。"日本不会从中得到什么好处，也不会提高日本的全球地位"。



North Korea has acknowledged kidnapping 13 Japanese nationals in the 1970s and 1980s; Japan says North Korea abducted 17 people as part of a plot to train spies. It’s impossible to exaggerate how big an issue this is for Japan’s right wing, a group the ruling Liberal Democratic Party has long coddled. In 2002, Abe himself accompanied Iijima and mentor Koizumi, then Japan’s prime minister, to Pyongyang to pursue it.

朝鲜承认在 20 世纪 70 年代和 80 年代绑架了 13 名日本国民；日本称朝鲜绑架了 17 人，作为训练间谍阴谋的一部分。这对日本右翼来说是一个多么大的问题，怎么夸大都不为过，而执政党自民党长期以来一直在纵容右翼。2002 年，安倍晋三亲自陪同饭岛和他的导师、时任日本首相的小泉前往平壤追查此事。



Privately, Abe advisers argue that resolving the dispute will enable them to join the international community in isolating the Kim regime. Yet even this limited outreach to Pyongyang has already proved a public relations disaster. The Korean Central News Agency exposed Iijima’s supposedly top-secret trip, gleefully driving a wedge between America and its closest ally in Asia. If Abe persists, he’s sure to alienate not just the Americans but also the Chinese and South Koreans. “Bad feelings could intensify very quickly if Japan feels emboldened to pursue narrow interests at the expense of global progress,” Dujarric said.

安倍的顾问们私下认为，解决这一争端将使他们能够与国际社会一道孤立金氏政权。然而，即使是这种与平壤的有限接触也已被证明是一场公关灾难。朝鲜中央通讯社（Korean Central News Agency）曝光了饭岛所谓的绝密之行，乐此不疲地挑拨美国与其在亚洲最亲密盟友之间的关系。如果安倍一意孤行，他肯定不仅会疏远美国人，还会疏远中国人和韩国人。"杜雅尔里克说："如果日本感到有恃无恐，以牺牲全球进步为代价追求狭隘利益，那么恶感可能会迅速加剧。



This seems to be developing into a pattern with Abe. When Japan most needs to build bridges to its neighbors, the government remains fixated on parochial issues that fuel regional resentment. Abe’s economic policies have driven down the yen, angering Korean and Chinese exporters. How have Japanese officials responded? By visiting the controversial Yasukuni Shrine. At a time when markets want to hear about serious structural reforms from Abe, he seems more interested in talking about revising Japan’s pacifist constitution.

这似乎正在成为安倍的一种模式。在日本最需要与邻国架起沟通桥梁的时候，政府却仍然执着于助长地区怨恨的狭隘问题。安倍的经济政策导致日元贬值，激怒了韩国和中国的出口商。日本官员是如何应对的呢？参拜有争议的靖国神社。当市场希望从安倍口中听到严肃的结构性改革时，他似乎更有兴趣谈论修改日本的和平主义宪法。



Optimists still hope that with majorities in both houses of parliament, Abe will worry less about nurturing his right-wing base. Perhaps then he could start more serious economic reforms, stop talking about the constitution, and wholeheartedly join the international effort to isolate North Korea. Or perhaps his party’s hold on power will embolden him to go his own way and possibly even visit Pyongyang, as his predecessor, Koizumi, did in 2002 and 2004. Such a trip would be aimed more at learning about the fate of Japanese abductees than world peace.

乐观的人仍然希望，在获得参众两院多数席位后，安倍晋三会减少对扶植其右翼基础的担忧。也许到那时，他可以开始更认真的经济改革，不再谈论宪法，全心全意地加入国际社会孤立朝鲜的努力。或者，也许他的政党对权力的掌控会让他更有勇气走自己的路，甚至有可能访问平壤，就像他的前任小泉在 2002 年和 2004 年所做的那样。这次访问的目的与其说是为了世界和平，不如说是为了了解日本被绑架者的命运。



This would be a dangerous path. Few nations would benefit more from a stable, denuclearized Korean Peninsula than Japan. Its export-focused economy is heavily dependent on the goodwill of its neighbors: China and South Korea alone import some $443 billion worth of Japanese goods annually. If Abe really wants to revive Japan and make the country stable and secure, he should take a lead role in working with his neighbors rather than against them to foster greater peace and stability.

这将是一条危险的道路。一个稳定、无核化的朝鲜半岛将使日本受益匪浅。日本以出口为主的经济严重依赖邻国的善意：仅中国和韩国每年就进口价值约 4430 亿美元的日本商品。如果安倍晋三真的想振兴日本，让国家变得稳定和安全，他就应该发挥带头作用，与邻国合作而不是对抗，以促进更大的和平与稳定。



The true state of affairs in Pyongyang grew even more uncertain in 2013. On December 12, 2013, Jang Song-thaek, Kim Jong-un’s uncle and number two, was executed. Rarer still than a Kim purging a family member was the fact that the official North Korean media publicized it and even explained the rationale behind it (Jang allegedly was lining his pockets and plotting a coup). Jang’s inglorious downfall sent shockwaves through the halls of Asian power because he was close to China, the Kim dynasty’s main benefactor, and the only government official with real leverage over Pyongyang.

2013 年，平壤的真实情况更加扑朔迷离。2013 年 12 月 12 日，金正恩的二叔张成泽被处决。比金正恩清洗家人更罕见的是，朝鲜官方媒体公开了这一事实，甚至解释了背后的原因（据称张成泽中饱私囊，密谋政变）。张琏瑰的不光彩下台在亚洲的权力殿堂中引起了震动，因为他与金氏王朝的主要恩人中国关系密切，是唯一能真正左右平壤的政府官员。



Jang had long been associated with Chinese-style economic innovations such as the series of special economic zones planned in the north, steps thought to hold the greatest potential for change on the Korean Peninsula. The hope was that Jang had the gravitas to prod Kim, a newish and rather untested leader, toward opening the world’s most isolated economy. When he succeeded his father, Kim Jong-il, who died in December 2011, many Pyongyang watchers hoped Kim would shift his impoverished nation of 24 million people onto a less ruinous path.

长期以来，张琏瑰一直与中国式的经济创新联系在一起，如计划在北方建立的一系列经济特区，这些措施被认为是朝鲜半岛最具变革潜力的步骤。人们希望张琏瑰具有足够的威望，能够推动金正日这位久经考验的新领导人开放这个世界上最孤立的经济体。金正日的父亲金正日于 2011 年 12 月去世，当他接替父亲的位置时，许多平壤观察家希望金正日能让这个拥有 2400 万人口的贫穷国家走上一条不那么糟糕的道路。



When he took over, Kim the younger was an untested twentysomething—a callow, Swiss-educated Michael Jordan fan at the top of the world’s most repressive regime. And Jang, the thinking went, would serve as regent to guide the young leader through the thickets of Pyongyang politics and international challenges. The true source of their falling-out may never be known. But the execution of Jang suggests that Kim is instead digging in his heels and doubling down on the Kim family playbook of blackmailing the world for food and financial support with nuclear-weapons tests, missile launches, and threatening to rain fire on Seoul and Tokyo at the slightest provocation. This is no time for Abe to be acting unilaterally for limited domestic gains.

当年轻的金正日接手政权时，他还是一个未经考验的二十出头的年轻人--一个受过瑞士教育的迈克尔-乔丹（Michael Jordan）的粉丝。当时的想法是，张琏瑰将作为摄政王，指导年轻的领导人应对平壤政治和国际挑战的重重困难。他们失和的真正原因可能永远不得而知。但张琏瑰被处决表明，金正日正在固步自封，加倍奉行金氏家族的惯用伎俩，即通过核武器试验、导弹发射以及稍有挑衅就向首尔和东京开火的威胁来讹诈世界，以获得粮食和财政支持。现在不是安倍为有限的国内利益单方面采取行动的时候。



“The hope all along was to persuade the North Koreans to reform and open,” said author Bradley Martin. “With Jang dead, who in Pyongyang is going to argue for that now? Anyone who does is automatically part of Jang’s conspiracy and probably in receipt of Chinese kickbacks, by definition.” Bottom line, Martin added, is that it’s anyone’s guess where Kim plans to take his nation in the years ahead. “If ever there were an issue that deserved international cooperation,” Martin said, “it’s this one.” To outsiders, Asia’s tit-for-tat diplomacy seems as arcane as it does counterproductive. Can’t the region move past its squabbles over shrine visits, history books, and how far this apology or that one went? The obvious lesson from Japan’s experience is that denying the past and hoping the world will forget about it won’t endear you to the aggrieved. There’s a lost-in-translation problem here that Japan refuses to acknowledge. Japanese officialdom, for example, contends, with U.S. support for the most part, that the San Francisco Peace Treaty of 1951 settled the matter. Tokyo believes the document ended all controversies over its wartime actions and reparation agreements with China, Korea, and the rest of Asia.

"作者布拉德利-马丁（Bradley Martin）说："我们一直希望说服朝鲜改革开放。作者布拉德利-马丁（Bradley Martin）说，"张琏瑰死后，平壤有谁还会为此争辩？任何这样做的人都会自动成为张琏瑰阴谋的一部分，而且很可能收受中国的回扣。马丁补充说，底线是金正恩计划在未来几年把他的国家带向何方，谁也说不准。"马丁说："如果说有什么问题值得国际合作的话，那就是这个问题。在局外人看来，亚洲针锋相对的外交似乎既神秘莫测，又适得其反。难道该地区就不能摆脱在参拜神社、历史书籍以及这个道歉或那个道歉的程度上的争吵吗？从日本的经历中得到的一个显而易见的教训是，否认过去并希望世界将其遗忘，并不会让受害国对你产生好感。日本拒绝承认这其中存在翻译上的失误。例如，在美国的大力支持下，日本官方认为 1951 年的《旧金山和约》已经解决了这一问题。东京认为，这份文件结束了有关其战时行动以及与中国、朝鲜和亚洲其他国家达成的赔偿协议的所有争议。



Officials in Beijing have very different interpretations, particularly on the right of individuals to seek compensation. China and Korean officials, meanwhile, still want their Willy Brandt moment. In December 1970, then–German Chancellor Brandt dropped to his knees in contrition before a monument to the Warsaw Ghetto uprising of 1943. His gesture of apology, repentance, and humility moved the world and created a very high bar for Japan. In 1995, as the fiftieth anniversary of Japan’s surrender approached, then–Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama sensed Japan needed to say more about the past. His famous statement was that Japan, “following a mistaken national policy, advanced along the road to war . . . and, through its colonial rule and aggression, caused tremendous damage and suffering to the people of many countries, particularly to those of Asian nations.”

北京的官员们有着截然不同的解释，尤其是在个人寻求赔偿的权利方面。与此同时，中国和韩国的官员们仍然希望得到他们的威利-勃兰特时刻。1970 年 12 月，时任德国总理勃兰特跪在 1943 年华沙犹太人起义纪念碑前忏悔。他道歉、忏悔和谦卑的姿态感动了全世界，也为日本树立了很高的标杆。1995 年，日本投降 50 周年纪念日临近，时任首相村山富市意识到日本需要对过去有更多的交代。他的名言是，日本 "奉行错误的国家政策，沿着通往战争的道路前进......。......通过其殖民统治和侵略，给许多国家，特别是亚洲国家的人民造成了巨大的损害和痛苦"。



Better, Asia thought, but still no Brandt-style cathartic break with the enmity of the past. To the Japanese, Murayama’s heartfelt declaration was bold, sweeping, and final. To Chinese and Koreans, it was woefully vague. What specifically about Japan’s aggression was mistaken? Asians asked. Explain what you mean by aggression, observers wanted to know. And toward whom was it directed and why? And when will Tokyo start writing checks to individuals, families, and businesses? The question for many Japanese is, Why do we still have to apologize after six-plus decades of peace and contributions to the global community?

亚洲人认为，情况好了一些，但仍然没有实现勃兰特式的一雪前耻。对日本人来说，村山的衷心声明是大胆、全面和最终的。而对中国人和韩国人来说，它却含糊不清。日本的侵略具体有哪些错误？亚洲人问道。观察员们想知道，请解释一下侵略是什么意思。侵略的对象和原因是什么？东京何时开始向个人、家庭和企业开出支票？对许多日本人来说，问题是：为什么在六十多年的和平和对国际社会的贡献之后，我们还要道歉？



“That may well be, but there is something in the world today that I call a ‘global memory culture,’” Carol Gluck, a professor of Japanese history at New York’s Columbia University, told the Wall Street Journal on September 17, 2013.

"纽约哥伦比亚大学日本史教授卡罗尔-格鲁克（Carol Gluck）2013 年 9 月 17 日对《华尔街日报》说："很可能是这样，但当今世界有一种东西，我称之为'全球记忆文化'。



This refers to the new international norms that have developed over the past half-century about what a country is expected to acknowledge about its past actions. A main factor in the evolution of this global memory culture was Europe’s coming to terms with the Holocaust. What we now routinely call the “politics of apology” is itself almost completely new. Heads of states in the 1950s were not expected as a routine matter to say “I’m sorry” to other countries, even when reparations were involved.

这是指在过去半个世纪中形成的新的国际准则，即一个国家应承认其过去的行为。这种全球记忆文化演变的一个主要因素是欧洲对大屠杀的接受。我们现在通常所说的 "道歉政治 "本身几乎是全新的。20 世纪 50 年代，人们并不期望国家元首例行公事地对其他国家说 "对不起"，即使是在涉及赔偿的情况下。





Here, too, we see another example of the world changing rapidly around Japan, but Japan remaining on Galapagos. “Japanese politicians avoided public acknowledgment of Japan’s wartime past in Asia for a very long time, partly because of the Japan–U.S. relationship, which had frozen memory of the Pacific War with little emphasis on the China War or indeed on China, which of course was Communist and thus in the other camp,” Gluck said.

在这里，我们还可以看到另一个例子，即世界在日本周围迅速变化，但日本仍留在加拉帕戈斯。"格鲁克说："在很长一段时间里，日本政治家避免公开承认日本在亚洲的战时历史，部分原因是日美关系冻结了对太平洋战争的记忆，很少强调中国战争或中国，而中国当然是共产主义国家，因此属于另一个阵营。



But after the end of the Cold War, the Japan–U.S. relationship was no longer the only relationship that mattered. Japan had increasingly to deal with Asia and China and their demands, which compelled the Japanese government to face war memory in a different register in the early 1990s. And when the government did so, it encountered a world where the norms of war memory had changed since the 1950s. . . . The LDP may want to make domestic political use of the wartime past, but the international context has changed rather dramatically. One evidence of this is the series of U.S. congressional resolutions that have been passed since the 1990s demanding that Japan deal with the issues of the comfort women, the Nanjing Massacre, compensation for victims, and so on. And this is the United States, not South Korea or China.

但冷战结束后，日美关系不再是唯一重要的关系。日本不得不越来越多地应对亚洲和中国及其要求，这迫使日本政府在 20 世纪 90 年代初以不同的方式面对战争记忆。当政府这样做的时候，它遇到的是一个战争记忆的准则自 20 世纪 50 年代以来已经发生了变化的世界。. ..自民党可能希望在国内政治上利用战时历史，但国际环境已经发生了巨大变化。自 20 世纪 90 年代以来，美国国会通过了一系列决议，要求日本处理慰安妇、南京大屠杀、受害者赔偿等问题，就是一个证明。而这是美国，而不是韩国或中国。





In the current Asian climate, with China surging ahead and Korea rapidly catching up, nationalism among Japanese politicians is proving toxic. And for better or worse, Yasukuni sits at the center. Temple’s Kingston calls it “ground zero for an unrepentant view of Japan’s wartime aggression.” In Kingston’s view, the shrine itself is less radioactive as an issue than the accompanying Yushukan museum.

在当前的亚洲形势下，中国正一路高歌猛进，韩国也在迅速追赶，日本政客的民族主义已被证明是有毒的。无论好坏，靖国都处于中心位置。坦普尔大学的金斯顿称其为 "对日本战时侵略不思悔改的原点"。在金斯顿看来，靖国神社本身的辐射性要小于与之配套的 "勇者馆"。



“The museum presents a selective and sly reinterpretation of Japan’s shared history with Asia—one that is antithetical to reconciliation, convinces few Japanese, and offends neighboring nations that endured the brunt of Japan’s imperial aggression,” Kingston said. “Politicians who insist that they are only paying tribute to those who died for their country when they visit Yasukuni are not telling the truth. If that’s all they wanted to do, they could walk five minutes down the road to Chidorigafuchi National Cemetery, which is, like Arlington, Japan’s officially designated war cemetery.”

"金斯敦说："博物馆对日本与亚洲的共同历史进行了有选择性的、狡猾的重新诠释，这种诠释与和解背道而驰，很少有日本人信服这种诠释，而且还冒犯了首当其冲遭受日本帝国主义侵略的邻国。"那些坚称参拜靖国神社只是向为国捐躯者致敬的政客并没有说实话。如果这就是他们想做的事情，他们可以沿路步行五分钟前往千鸟渊国家公墓，那里和阿灵顿一样，是日本官方指定的战争公墓。



Yasukuni is simply a diplomatic dead end. Announcing a moratorium on visits by any serving Cabinet ministers would be a good start. From there, active lawmakers of all parties should abstain from going. “If Abe is truly looking for a new beginning—for himself, and for Japan’s relations with its neighbors—that’s where he should start,” Kingston said.

靖国是一个外交死胡同。宣布暂停任何现任内阁大臣参拜靖国神社将是一个良好的开端。从那时起，所有党派的现任议员都应该放弃参拜。"金斯敦说："如果安倍真的在为自己、为日本与邻国的关系寻找新的开端，那他就应该从这里开始。



That would go a long way toward enhancing Japan’s soft power. So would ending deflation once and for all and opening the economy. But successive Japanese governments have damaged Japan’s international standing to curry favor with the nation’s political right wing. What’s the point of driving down the yen if two of your biggest customers boycott your goods? Japan has a daunting and well-known catalog of challenges, from long-term economic stagnation to removing limits to trade to rebuilding the part of the country devastated by the tsunami to political dysfunction. The LDP must tackle each problem with an urgency few past prime ministers displayed. Yet Abe’s LDP seems more interested in flexing muscles in Asia than building them. What the party doesn’t understand is that the way for Japan to thrive in the twenty-first century isn’t by reviving the ideas of the nineteenth. A more humble and pragmatic foreign policy would be focused on greater leadership in the decades ahead and threats as varied as China’s growing navy to North Korea’s nukes to America’s pivot east.

这将大大增强日本的软实力。一劳永逸地结束通货紧缩和开放经济也是如此。但日本历届政府为了讨好国内右翼政治势力，损害了日本的国际地位。如果你的两个最大客户抵制你的商品，那么压低日元汇率又有什么意义呢？从长期经济停滞到取消贸易限制，从重建被海啸摧毁的国土到政治功能失调，日本面临着一系列众所周知的严峻挑战。自民党必须以历届首相少有的紧迫感解决每一个问题。然而，安倍的自民党似乎更热衷于在亚洲大展拳脚，而不是建立肌肉。该党不明白的是，日本要在 21 世纪蓬勃发展，并不是靠重拾 19 世纪的理念。一个更加谦逊和务实的外交政策应着眼于在未来几十年中发挥更大的领导作用，以及应对各种威胁，如中国海军的壮大、朝鲜的核武器、美国的东移等。





Too often, Japan thinks marketing campaigns and slogans are enough. Japan has long had trouble capitalizing on its soft power around the globe. Abe certainly tried in New York in September, with references to baseball star Ichiro Suzuki, sushi, bullet trains, and advances in maglev rail technology, which Japan is itching to export to America’s Northeast corridor. It was in keeping with Abe’s efforts during his first 2006–2007 stint as prime minister, one followed closely by Lam Peng Er of the East Asian Institute at the National University of Singapore. In an October 2007 report on what many observers deride as “Hello Kitty diplomacy,” Lam agrued that “despite the attractiveness of Japanese pop culture and other more traditional forms of public diplomacy, Tokyo’s pursuit of ‘soft power’ and a good international image is undermined by its failure to overcome its burden of history.”

很多时候，日本认为营销活动和口号就足够了。长期以来，日本一直难以在全球范围内利用其软实力。安倍今年 9 月在纽约当然也做了尝试，他提到了棒球明星铃木一郎、寿司、子弹头列车和磁悬浮列车技术的进步，日本正迫不及待地想把这些技术出口到美国的东北走廊。这与安倍晋三在 2006-2007 年担任首相期间所做的努力不谋而合，新加坡国立大学东亚研究所的林鹏尔也紧随其后。在 2007 年 10 月的一份关于被许多观察家讥讽为 "Hello Kitty 外交 "的报告中，林鹏尔认为 "尽管日本流行文化和其他更传统的公共外交形式很有吸引力，但东京对'软实力'和良好国际形象的追求却因未能克服历史包袱而受到损害"。



It’s a ploy to which many of his predecessors resorted. In 2010, the government set up a creative-industries office to accelerate things to raise Japan’s profile. The hope was that growing interest in Japanese food, fashion, animation, comics, films, music, and global phenomena like Hello Kitty and Pokemon would do the government’s work for it.

这是他的许多前任都采用过的策略。2010 年，政府成立了创意产业办公室，以加快提高日本知名度的步伐。政府希望，人们对日本食品、时装、动画、漫画、电影、音乐以及 Hello Kitty 和 Pokemon 等全球现象日益增长的兴趣能为政府分忧解难。



No cultural icon has gone more global than Hello Kitty, and the tale of how Sanrio Ltd. brought the all-but-featureless character worldwide fame is fascinating in itself. It’s become not just a staple of the kawaii, or cute, segment of Japanese popular culture but of globalization. But the soft power Japan might get from its ubiquitous kitty doesn’t amount to a foreign policy. Nor does anime, cosplay, or comic books. In 2009, when he was prime minister, Taro Aso championed the construction of a manga museum to boost Japan’s global brand. His government’s schoolgirl tour, remember, did more to turn Japan Inc. into a punchline than capitalize on Japan’s all-things-cute craze.

没有哪个文化标志比 Hello Kitty 更能走向世界，三丽鸥有限公司如何让这个毫无特色的卡通形象享誉全球的故事本身就很吸引人。它不仅是日本流行文化中 "卡哇伊 "或 "可爱 "的代表，也是全球化的代表。但是，日本可能从其无处不在的小猫身上获得的软实力并不等同于外交政策。动漫、Cosplay 或漫画书也是如此。2009 年，麻生太郎在担任首相时曾倡导建造一座漫画博物馆，以提升日本的全球品牌。还记得他的政府的女学生之旅吗，与其说是利用了日本的一切可爱事物热潮，不如说是把日本公司变成了一个笑柄。



Nothing would sell Japan Inc. globally like organic economic success. Revive the economy, reinvigorate your biggest corporate names, unleash a wave of innovation among young people, and the international clout Japan craves will follow. Abe’s clumsy sales job in September was emblematic of Japanese governments past and present. Something was definitely lost in translation when the self-described reformist prime minister visited the New York Stock Exchange and raised the specter of Gordon Gekko, the greed-is-good villain of Oliver Stone’s 1987 film, Wall Street. While the Big Board has been trying to weed out insider trading since the 1980s, Abe declared without irony: “Today, I have come to tell you that Japan will once again be a country where there is money to be made, and that just as Gordon Gekko made a comeback in the financial world . . . so, too, can we now say that Japan is back.”

没有什么能比经济的有机成功更能向全球推销日本公司了。振兴经济，重振大型企业，在年轻人中掀起创新浪潮，日本渴望的国际影响力就会随之而来。安倍 9 月份拙劣的推销工作是日本政府过去和现在的象征。当这位自诩为改革派的首相访问纽约证券交易所时，让人联想到奥利弗-斯通（Oliver Stone）1987 年的电影《华尔街》（Wall Street）中贪婪成性的大反派戈登-盖科（Gordon Gekko）。自 20 世纪 80 年代以来，纽约证券交易所一直在努力杜绝内幕交易，而安倍晋三却不无讽刺地宣称："今天，我是来告诉大家，日本将再次成为一个有钱可赚的国家，正如戈登-盖科在金融界卷土重来一样......我们现在也可以说，日本回来了"。



Abe’s pained simile prompted a rapid, rather awkward clarification from Japan’s government: The prime minister, of course, was referring not to the original Wall Street but to Stone’s 2010 sequel, subtitled Money Never Sleeps, in which Gekko emerges from prison driven by revenge and lust to rehabilitate his reputation. The second awkward moment came when Abe used the heavy-metal band Metallica as a plot device to talk up Japan’s prospects and excitement over the 2020 Tokyo Olympics. “Japan is once again in the midst of great elation as we prepare for the Games seven years from now,” Abe said. “It is almost as if Metallica’s ‘Enter Sandman’ is resounding throughout Yankee Stadium—you know how this is going to end.”

安倍痛苦的比喻引起了日本政府迅速而尴尬的澄清：首相所指的当然不是《华尔街》原著，而是斯通在 2010 年拍摄的续集《金钱永不眠》（Money Never Sleeps）。第二个尴尬时刻出现在安倍利用重金属乐队 Metallica 作为情节设置，大谈日本的前景和对 2020 年东京奥运会的兴奋之情。"安倍晋三说："我们正在为七年后的奥运会做准备，日本又一次沉浸在巨大的喜悦之中。"安倍晋三说："就好像 Metallica 乐队的《Enter Sandman》响彻整个扬基体育场--你知道这将会是怎样的结局。



Perhaps Abe missed the fact that Mariano Rivera, the Yankees’ closer who enters games to Metallica’s 1991 hit, has retired and won’t be around anymore to guarantee a winning end. Abe may also want to check out the less-than-optimistic lyrics to “Enter Sandman.” It’s tempting to look for Freudian angles to these rather strained pop-culture references. One is the level of Abe’s delusions of grandeur when he implored the crowd to “buy my Abenomics.” Referring to yourself, or a phenomenon you unleash, in the third person is often an ominous sign. When Abe says his nation is “in the midst of great elation,” I’m thinking he needs to stop believing his own press and get out more. Confidence in Abenomics is still an overseas phenomenon, not a domestic one. Is Sony using its sudden return to profit to up wages? No. Are Japanese households releasing a couple of decades’ worth of pent-up demand? Hardly. Are expansion-minded companies like Honda and Mazda opening new factories in Japan? Try Thailand. Isn’t radiation still leaking 135 miles away from Tokyo’s own equity bourse?

也许安倍晋三忽略了一个事实，那就是洋基队的终结者马里亚诺-里维拉（Mariano Rivera）曾在 Metallica 1991 年的名曲中进入比赛，如今他已经退役，再也不能保证比赛的胜利结局了。安倍晋三可能还想看看 "Enter Sandman"（进入沙人）这首不太乐观的歌词。我们很容易从弗洛伊德的角度来看待这些相当紧张的流行文化引用。其一是安倍在恳求民众 "购买我的安倍经济学 "时的妄想程度。用第三人称来称呼自己或自己创造的现象往往是不祥之兆。当安倍晋三说他的国家 "正处于巨大的喜悦之中 "时，我认为他需要停止相信自己的媒体，多走出去。对安倍经济学的信心仍然是海外现象，而不是国内现象。索尼会利用其突然恢复的利润来提高工资吗？日本家庭是否在释放几十年来被压抑的需求？很难说。本田（Honda）和马自达（Mazda）等具有扩张意识的公司会在日本开设新工厂吗？试试泰国吧。距离东京自己的证券交易所 135 英里的地方不是还在泄漏辐射吗？



What looked suspiciously like an Abe victory tour of America is wildly premature. Yes, Abe deserves credit for hiring Kuroda to run the Bank of Japan, where the governor engineered a huge change in international perceptions about a nation that was left for dead just months ago. But almost nothing has been done to better utilize the female workforce, reduce trade barriers, cultivate entrepreneurship, prepare for an aging workforce, internationalize corporate tax rates, find an alternative to nuclear reactors, wrest government power away from a vast, unproductive and sometimes corrupt bureaucracy, and improve relations with Asian neighbors. It’s great that Abe is putting these issues on the table for discussion, but it’s far too early to be telling Wall Street that Japan is back and better than ever. That day is years off, at best. Stone’s Gekko character, remember, was never meant to be a hero, but the personification of the hubris of a particularly delusional moment in time. It’s too soon for Abe to be indulging his own delusions so early in a multiyear battle against vested interests that are determined to halt Abenomics in its tracks. Of course, that may be easy compared to mending fences in Asia.

看起来疑似安倍的美国胜利之旅还为时过早。是的，安倍聘请黑田东彦管理日本央行值得称赞，这位行长使国际社会对日本的看法发生了巨大变化，而就在几个月前，人们还对这个国家视而不见。但是，在更好地利用女性劳动力、减少贸易壁垒、培养企业家精神、为老龄化劳动力做好准备、实现企业税率国际化、寻找核反应堆的替代方案、从庞大、缺乏生产力、有时甚至腐败的官僚机构中夺回政府权力，以及改善与亚洲邻国的关系等方面，安倍几乎什么也没做。安倍晋三将这些问题摆在桌面上讨论是件好事，但现在就告诉华尔街日本回来了，而且比以前更好了，还为时过早。这一天充其量还得等上好几年。请记住，斯通饰演的盖葛从来都不是英雄，而是一个特别妄想的时代狂妄自大的化身。对安倍晋三来说，在与决心阻止安倍经济学发展的既得利益集团的多年斗争中，这么早就沉溺于自己的妄想还为时过早。当然，与在亚洲修补篱笆相比，这可能很容易。





In May 2013, Abe was taken aback when a U.S. Congressional Research Service paper characterized him as a “strong nationalist.” Abe’s rebuttal came before parliament days later, where he expressed dismay that foreigners were misinterpreting his policies. Then again, Abe himself has made impassioned remarks over the years espousing the merits of nationalism. In an October 2, 2006, parliament address, Abe said “nationalism as I think of it is a sense of belonging to the nation, ancestors, family, and the local community where one was born and brought up and with which one has become familiar. This sense of belonging is not something that we are told to have, but is completely natural and spontaneous.” He concluded by saying that being called a nationalist is a compliment.

2013 年 5 月，当美国国会研究服务部的一份文件将安倍定性为 "强烈的民族主义者 "时，他大吃一惊。几天后，安倍在国会上进行了反驳，对外国人曲解他的政策表示失望。不过，安倍本人多年来也曾慷慨陈词，宣扬民族主义的优点。2006 年 10 月 2 日，安倍晋三在国会发表讲话时说："我认为民族主义是一种对国家、祖先、家庭和自己出生、成长并熟悉的当地社区的归属感。这种归属感不是别人告诉我们要有的，而是完全自然和自发的。他最后说，被称为民族主义者是一种褒奖。



Shintaro Ishihara is an unapologetic nationalist who favors acquiring nuclear weapons and has tossed enough insults at women, foreigners in Tokyo, and gays to fill a small library. He also bears direct responsibility for rapidly deteriorating relations between Japan and China. Ishihara prodded the national government to buy disputed islands that the Japanese call Senkaku and the Chinese call Diaoyu. On September 11, 2012, Tokyo did just that, paying $26 million to take a stand against China. Fourteen months later, Beijing took its own.

石原慎太郎是一个不折不扣的民族主义者，他赞成获取核武器，对女性、在东京的外国人和同性恋者的侮辱足以填满一个小型图书馆。他还对日中关系迅速恶化负有直接责任。石原怂恿日本政府购买有争议的岛屿，日本人称这些岛屿为尖阁，中国人称这些岛屿为钓鱼岛。2012 年 9 月 11 日，东京就这样做了，支付了 2600 万美元，以表明反对中国的立场。14 个月后，北京也采取了自己的行动。



During November 9–12, 2013, China’s Communist Party leader held a summit that recast Xi as a reformer extraordinaire and produced its first foreign-policy initiative: poking Japan in the eye. That seemed to be the point of China’s declaration of a vast “air defense identification zone,” in which Beijing has essentially claimed the airspace around disputed islands administered by Japan. The provocation came just two weeks after the party called for a new national security council to coordinate military, domestic, and intelligence operations in China. Political analysts who worried that the body might herald a deepening Asian Cold War weren’t being entirely paranoid. There’s nothing particularly shocking about establishing such a council, state-run media said. The United States and Russia both have one, after all, and even Japan is talking about creating its own. Besides, as the Xinhua News Agency was kind enough to inform readers in a November 22 explainer piece, “China is a stabilizer for world peace and security, and the new commission is like a performance guarantee for the stabilizer and will in turn bring benefits to the whole world.”

2013 年 11 月 9 日至 12 日，中国共产党领导人召开了一次峰会，将习近平重新塑造成一位卓越的改革者，并提出了中国外交政策的第一个倡议：戳日本的眼睛。这似乎正是中国宣布划设广阔的 "防空识别区 "的目的所在，在该识别区内，北京实质上声称拥有日本管理的争议岛屿周围的领空。就在这次挑衅两周前，中国共产党要求成立一个新的国家安全委员会来协调中国的军事、内政和情报行动。那些担心该机构可能预示着亚洲冷战加深的政治分析家并非完全多疑。国营媒体说，成立这样一个委员会并没有什么特别令人震惊的。毕竟，美国和俄罗斯都有这样一个机构，甚至日本也在讨论建立自己的机构。此外，正如新华社在 11 月 22 日的一篇解释性文章中善意地告诉读者的那样，"中国是世界和平与安全的稳定器，新的委员会就像是稳定器的性能保证，反过来也会给整个世界带来好处"。



Tell that to Itsunori Onodera, Japan’s minister of defense, who had to decode what China means when it warns that its military may take “defensive emergency measures” if planes don’t identify themselves in the new air defense zone. Or Onodera’s Korean counterpart, Kim Kwan-jin: Some of China’s zone overlaps with waters off Jeju Island. Or Chuck Hagel, the U.S. defense chief, who got dragged into the controversy and responded, boldly, by flying two unarmed B-52 bombers into the area as a warning to Beijing to back off. China’s move belied all the talk of its peaceful, magnanimous rise as a world power. A tiny accident or miscalculation in the skies above the disputed islands could easily spiral out of control, dragging Washington into a clash that would shake the global economy. Instead of being a stabilizer, China is proving to be a provocateur. It’s hard not to wonder if political testosterone has gone to Xi’s head. He emerged from China’s November conclave as the most powerful Chinese leader since Deng Xiaoping. Xi may be especially willing to risk a confrontation with Japan right now in order to distract opponents of his proposed reforms, as well as ordinary Chinese who are growing restless over pollution, income inequality, and official corruption. Nothing brings China’s 1.3 billion people together so easily as hating the Japanese.

日本防卫大臣小野寺五典（Itsunori Onodera）不得不解读中国警告称，如果飞机在新防空区内不表明自己的身份，中国军方可能会采取 "紧急防御措施"。小野寺的韩国国防部长金宽镇（Kim Kwan-jin）也是如此：中国防空区的部分区域与济州岛附近海域重叠。美国防长查克-哈格尔（Chuck Hagel）也被卷入了这场争论，他大胆地做出了回应，将两架未装备武器的 B-52 轰炸机飞入该地区，警告中国政府退让。中国的这一举动使其和平、大度地崛起为世界强国的言论不攻自破。在争议岛屿上空发生的一起微小事故或误判很容易导致事态失控，将华盛顿拖入一场动摇全球经济的冲突。事实证明，中国非但不是一个稳定器，反而是一个挑衅者。很难不让人怀疑习近平的政治睾丸激素是否已经冲昏了头脑。在 11 月的中国会议上，他成为邓小平之后最有权势的中国领导人。现在，习近平可能特别愿意冒着与日本对抗的风险，以转移反对他所提出的改革方案的人以及对污染、收入不平等和官员腐败日益不满的普通中国人的注意力。没有什么比憎恨日本人更容易让中国的 13 亿人民团结在一起了。



China doesn’t deserve all the blame for the precarious state of northeast Asian affairs, of course. Just like Abe, Korean President Park rarely misses a chance to hammer Japan about the sins of the past, though the points she scores at home come at the expense of a critical bilateral relationship. Yet it’s China’s actions that most risk sparking conflict. They also contradict the spirit of reform and “opening up” repeatedly hailed at the Communist Party’s recent plenum. In addition to Japan and Korea, China’s air zone is sure to worry officials in Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Taiwan, all of which are embroiled in territorial disputes with Beijing. A group of Chinese scholars even want Beijing to claim Okinawa, too.

当然，东北亚事务的岌岌可危并非全怪中国。就像安倍晋三一样，韩国总统朴槿惠也很少放过任何机会来抨击日本过去犯下的罪行，尽管她在国内获得的分数是以牺牲重要的双边关系为代价的。然而，中国的行动最有可能引发冲突。它们也违背了中国共产党在最近的全会上反复宣扬的改革和 "开放 "精神。除了日本和韩国，中国的航空区肯定也会让文莱、印度尼西亚、马来西亚、菲律宾和台湾的官员感到担忧，这些国家都与中国政府存在领土争端。一群中国学者甚至希望中国政府也对冲绳提出主权要求。



Much of it really is an argument over China’s controversial “nine-dash” map. First published in the late 1940s, the map extends China’s territorial claims as much as 800 miles from Hainan Island to the equatorial waters off the coast of Borneo. China says the map proves its “indisputable sovereignty” over more than 100 islands, atolls, and reefs that form the Paracel and Spratly Islands. The rest of Asia disagrees.

其中很大一部分其实是关于中国备受争议的 "九段线 "地图的争论。九段线 "地图于 20 世纪 40 年代末首次出版，它将中国的领土主张从海南岛延伸到婆罗洲海岸附近的赤道水域，长达 800 英里。中国称该地图证明了其对西沙群岛和南沙群岛的 100 多个岛屿、环礁和暗礁拥有 "无可争辩的主权"。亚洲其他国家对此并不认同。



However powerful Xi has become, he’s not adding to China’s store of soft power with such behavior. The country took a big hit abroad for its miserly aid offering to the typhoon-devastated Philippines. Its inflammatory new policy will only further alienate neighbors in a region it’s seeking to woo away from the United States. America would be wise to take advantage of this dustup to advance its pivot to Asia that until now has lacked both carrots and sticks. U.S. officials should prod Abe to lead his people toward more enlightened engagement with Asia rather than follow his base’s nationalist instincts. They should encourage Park to work with Abe, even if just on trade, the environment, North Korea, and the challenges of governing a fast-aging population. Washington also should push the case for regular three-way summits between the leaders of Japan, China, and Korea no matter what’s afoot. Face-to-face meetings can create momentum toward deeper ties. But America’s sternest conversation should be with Communist leaders in Beijing. China says its global ambitions are peaceful and war isn’t in the national DNA. That’s great. It says it believes in mutual respect for other countries’ domestic affairs. That’s fine. It says it wants to “make Chinese culture go global.” It all sounds good. Beijing’s recent actions, however, inspire little confidence in its words.

无论习近平变得多么强大，他的这种行为并没有增加中国的软实力。中国向遭受台风袭击的菲律宾提供的吝啬援助在国外引起了轩然大波。中国煽动性的新政策只会进一步疏远邻国，而中国正试图将这一地区从美国身边拉开。美国明智的做法是利用这次争论推进其亚洲支点计划，因为到目前为止，该计划一直缺乏胡萝卜和大棒。美国官员应该敦促安倍带领他的人民与亚洲进行更开明的接触，而不是追随其基本民族主义的本能。他们应该鼓励朴槿惠与安倍合作，哪怕只是在贸易、环境、朝鲜以及治理快速老龄化人口的挑战方面。华盛顿还应该推动日中韩三国领导人定期举行三方峰会，无论发生什么。面对面的会谈可以为加深两国关系创造动力。但美国最严厉的对话应该是与北京的共产党领导人。中国说，它的全球野心是和平的，战争不是它的国家基因。这很好。中国说它相信相互尊重其他国家的内政。这很好。中国说要 "让中国文化走向世界"。听起来都不错。然而，北京最近的行动却让人对它的言辞缺乏信心。



One reason China’s efforts to develop its soft power have failed is the utilitarian way Beijing approaches the rest of the world. Instead of using culture, adept diplomacy, and trashy movies to seduce other countries, China hands out cold, hard cash. All the investment poured into railways in Indonesia, tunnels in Brazil, power grids in Cambodia, hydroelectric projects in Laos, bridges in Vietnam, roads in Zambia, factories in Malaysia, airports in Myanmar, and mining rigs in Uzbekistan comes with a high cost. In return, China demands complete docility. That’s the message being sent to the Philippines now.

中国发展软实力的努力之所以失败，原因之一是中国政府对待世界其他国家的方式过于功利。中国没有利用文化、高超的外交技巧和垃圾电影来诱惑其他国家，而是拿出了冷冰冰的硬通货。印尼的铁路、巴西的隧道、柬埔寨的电网、老挝的水电项目、越南的桥梁、赞比亚的公路、马来西亚的工厂、缅甸的机场、乌兹别克斯坦的采矿钻机，所有这些投资都付出了高昂的代价。作为回报，中国要求中国完全顺从。这就是中国现在向菲律宾发出的信息。



As hundreds of thousands of Filipinos struggled to find food, water, shelter, and the bodies of loved ones in the wake of Typhoon Haiyan, China quickly dipped into its world-leading $3.7 trillion of currency reserves and came up with—all of $100,000. That was Beijing’s first miserly offer of aid on November 12, 2013, to the storm-tossed Philippines. Two days later, an international outcry over China’s stinginess shamed it into upping its pledge to a modest $1.6 million worth of relief materials such as tents and blankets. But the damage was already done.

台风 "海燕 "过后，成千上万的菲律宾人努力寻找食物、水、住所和亲人的遗体，中国迅速动用了其世界领先的 3.7 万亿美元货币储备，只拿出了 10 万美元。这是中国政府在2013年11月12日向遭受风暴袭击的菲律宾提供的第一笔吝啬的援助。两天后，国际社会对中国的吝啬表示强烈不满，迫使中国将援助承诺提高到价值160万美元的帐篷和毯子等救灾物资。但损失已经造成。



“It’s very hard to call for de-Americanization and then leave your wallet at home when there’s a human disaster the scale of the typhoon in the Philippines,” said Ian Bremmer, president of Eurasia Group in New York. “Yes, China is a poor country. Yes, they have troubled relations with the Philippines. But this sits badly with anyone thinking about China’s rise in the region.” If he were advising President Xi Jinping, Bremmer says, “I’d push for major humanitarian aid to the Philippines.” Instead the bulk of that aid is coming from elsewhere: roughly $30 million each from Japan and Australia, $20 million from the United States, $17 million from the European Union, $16 million from the United Kingdom, $10 million from Japan, $5 million from South Korea, $4 million from the Vatican, and $2 million from Indonesia. China was clearly stung by the critical news coverage. Korean figure skater Kim Yu-na herself gave $100,000—about enough to buy nine bottles of a 2006 Romanee-Conti. Even the new Chinese offer is rather paltry. New Zealand’s $167 billion economy is a rounding error compared with China’s $8.4 trillion one. Yet officials in Wellington have come up with $1.7 million, even more than the People’s Republic.

"纽约欧亚集团（Eurasia Group）总裁伊恩-布雷默（Ian Bremmer）说："当菲律宾发生像台风这样大规模的人类灾难时，你很难一边呼吁去美国化，一边又把钱包留在家里。"是的，中国是一个贫穷的国家。是的，他们与菲律宾的关系很糟糕。但这对任何考虑中国在该地区崛起的人来说都是不利的。布雷默说，如果他是习近平主席的顾问，"我会推动向菲律宾提供大量人道主义援助"。然而，大部分援助却来自其他地方：日本和澳大利亚各提供了约3000万美元，美国提供了2000万美元，欧盟提供了1700万美元，英国提供了1600万美元，日本提供了1000万美元，韩国提供了500万美元，梵蒂冈提供了400万美元，印度尼西亚提供了200万美元。批评性的新闻报道显然刺痛了中国。韩国花样滑冰选手金宥娜本人也捐出了 10 万美元，大约够买九瓶 2006 年罗曼尼-康帝葡萄酒。即使是中国的新报价也相当微薄。新西兰 1670 亿美元的经济总量与中国 8.4 万亿美元的经济总量相比，简直是小巫见大巫。然而惠灵顿的官员们却拿出了 170 万美元，甚至比中华人民共和国还要多。



Why the insultingly small sum for a geopolitically vital nation of 106 million people that by many measures is much poorer than China? Manila’s close ties with Washington have always worried China. But this is personal. Philippine President Benigno Aquino refuses to bow to China’s territorial claims in the South China Sea, and enraged Beijing by daring to challenge its maritime claims before a UN-endorsed tribunal. Aquino also demands that China treat the Philippines, one of Asia’s oldest democracies, as an equal, not a subordinate. Nations hold grudges, of course. But China’s actions in November 2013 dramatically undercut what had been a very deliberate and strenuous—and supposedly successful—recent charm offensive. After President Obama skipped out on a summit of Asia-Pacific leaders last month, Xi and Premier Li gleefully toured Southeast Asian capitals, handing out investment deals to show how generous China could be with its neighbors, how eager it was for friendly relations. The Philippines crisis offered an opportunity for China to show it had developed into a mature, cooperative nation and to win goodwill across the region. As a matter of fact, Chinese and U.S. troops trained together in November 2013 for the first time in Hawaii, as part of a drill in which the two nations cooperate in a humanitarian relief operation in a third country. Why not agree to jump in and cooperate on enormous international rescue efforts like the one in the Philippines in the future? Instead, officials in Beijing find themselves evading awkward questions about their miserliness toward a nation that had given China $450,000 after the 2008 Sichuan earthquake. Even after China upped its aid offing to the Philippines, it still paled in comparison to what furniture maker Ikea Group donated and the $4.88 million Beijing gave to Pakistan after an earthquake there in September 2013.

对于一个拥有 1.06 亿人口、在地缘政治上举足轻重、在许多方面都比中国穷得多的国家来说，为什么要给它一笔少得令人羞愧的钱？马尼拉与华盛顿的密切关系一直令中国担忧。但这是针对个人的。菲律宾总统贝尼尼奥-阿基诺（Benigno Aquino）拒绝向中国在南海的领土要求低头，并因敢于在联合国认可的法庭上挑战中国的海洋主张而激怒了中国政府。阿基诺还要求中国平等对待菲律宾--亚洲最古老的民主国家之一--而非附属国。国家之间当然会有恩怨。但中国在 2013 年 11 月的行动却大大削弱了中国近来深思熟虑、咄咄逼人的魅力攻势，而这一攻势本应是成功的。奥巴马总统上月缺席亚太领导人峰会后，习近平和李总理兴高采烈地访问了东南亚各国首都，派发投资协议，展示中国对邻国是多么慷慨，多么渴望建立友好关系。菲律宾危机为中国提供了一个机会，展示自己已发展成为一个成熟、合作的国家，并在整个地区赢得好感。事实上，2013 年 11 月，中国和美国军队首次在夏威夷共同训练，这是两国在第三国合作开展人道主义救援行动的演习的一部分。为什么不同意加入进来，并在未来合作开展类似菲律宾的大型国际救援行动呢？相反，北京的官员们却发现自己在回避一些尴尬的问题，那就是他们对一个在 2008 年四川地震后向中国提供了 45 万美元援助的国家的吝啬态度。即使中国增加了对菲律宾的援助，但与家具制造商宜家集团的捐款以及中国政府在 2013 年 9 月巴基斯坦地震后向该国提供的 488 万美元相比，仍然相形见绌。



To more compliant nations, ones that don’t challenge its ambitions, China’s diplomatic checkbook is far more open. Arvind Subramanian, author of the 2011 book Eclipse: Living in the Shadow of China’s Economic Dominance, says China is going to be a “peculiar kind of superpower,” one whose attraction is more materialistic than heartfelt. “It won’t have the soft power the United States has—people wanting to come, people wanting to live, people wanting to emulate it,” he said. “That soft power is lacking, but it will not impede China.”

对于那些比较顺从、不挑战中国野心的国家，中国的外交支票簿要敞开得多。Arvind Subramanian 是 2011 年出版的《日蚀》一书的作者：一书的作者阿尔文德-苏布拉马尼安（Arvind Subramanian）说，中国将成为一个 "奇特的超级大国"，它的吸引力更多是物质上的，而不是发自内心的。"他说："它不会拥有美国所拥有的软实力--人们想来，人们想生活，人们想效仿它。他说，"中国缺乏这种软实力，但它不会阻碍中国的发展"。



I’m not so sure. If I were Aquino, I might’ve told China to keep its money; maybe Xi could use it to hire a public relations firm. As badly as the Philippines needs the help, so does China’s image.

我不太确定。如果我是阿基诺，我可能会让中国把钱留着，也许习近平可以用这笔钱雇一家公关公司。菲律宾急需帮助，中国的形象也急需帮助。



But Abe’s return has tossed its own wild card into Asian geopolitics. Of all the nightmares Xi figured he would have to face, a resurgent Japan Inc. surely wasn’t among them. A major slowdown in the Chinese economy? Yes. Social instability? Absolutely. Debilitating pollution? Check. Rampant corruption eating away at the Communist Party’s legitimacy? You bet. An economically resurgent Japan emboldened to challenge China for leadership in Asia? Hardly. With an assertive Abe at the helm, though, Japan may be poised to do just that, in ways that could upend the dynamics of Asia’s future. The emphasis here is on may. For all the excitement over Abenomics, it’s still a vague and unimaginative blueprint to end Japan’s 20-year funk. Still, let’s say the optimists prove right and Abe ends deflation and restores Japan’s economic clout in the region. It’s doubtful that the steady, “peaceful” rise to dominance envisioned by China includes sharing power with a renascent Japan. The Japanese recovery the world has long sought could well make Asia a much more dangerous place. This is the minefield into which the Obama White House is wandering as America rediscovers it’s a Pacific nation. The United States spent the past dozen years forgetting a fact that’s obvious from consulting a map or tracking container ships. When George W. Bush’s administration bothered with Asia, it was all terrorism all the time. Quite odd, considering how reliant the largest economy became on Asia’s money during his tenure. The region, as pointed out earlier, became America’s banker. Obama’s pivot east meant to end the neglect that allowed China to begin challenging U.S. primacy, and Beijing isn’t happy. It’s high time for this shift as a crisis-racked Europe turns inward and Asia booms. Yet the United States must engage Asia more wisely, constructively, and sincerely than in recent decades.

但安倍晋三的回归给亚洲地缘政治带来了不确定因素。在习近平认为他将不得不面对的所有噩梦中，一个重新崛起的日本公司肯定不在其中。中国经济大幅放缓？是的。社会不稳定？当然。严重污染？没错。猖獗的腐败侵蚀着共产党的合法性？没错。经济复苏的日本有胆量挑战中国在亚洲的领导地位？很难说。不过，有了自信的安倍晋三掌舵，日本可能正准备这样做，其方式可能会颠覆亚洲未来的态势。这里强调的是 "可能"。尽管 "安倍经济学 "令人兴奋，但它仍然是一个模糊而缺乏想象力的蓝图，无法结束日本长达 20 年的困境。不过，假设乐观主义者是正确的，安倍结束了通货紧缩，恢复了日本在该地区的经济影响力。中国设想的稳步、"和平 "崛起的霸主地位是否包括与重新崛起的日本分享权力，这一点值得怀疑。日本的复兴是世界孜孜以求的，它很可能会让亚洲变得更加危险。当美国重新发现自己是一个太平洋国家时，奥巴马白宫正徘徊在这个雷区。在过去的十几年里，美国忘记了一个事实，而这个事实在查阅地图或追踪集装箱船时显而易见。当小布什政府关心亚洲问题时，亚洲一直都是恐怖主义的天下。考虑到在他的任期内，美国这个最大的经济体变得如此依赖亚洲的资金，这就很奇怪了。如前所述，该地区成了美国的银行家。奥巴马的 "东向支点 "意在结束对中国的忽视，让中国开始挑战美国的首要地位，而中国政府并不高兴。随着饱受危机困扰的欧洲转向内向，亚洲蓬勃发展，现在是转变的时候了。然而，与近几十年来相比，美国必须更加明智、建设性和真诚地参与亚洲事务。



China’s irritation can be seen in what might be termed a culture war. The Americans and the Soviets had their Cold War; Washington and Beijing are now battling over soft power. First China took on Google Inc.’s search engine. Now the battle is over something bigger and more existential—saving the Chinese soul from Western encroachments. Is this a new Cultural Revolution? Not exactly; but China’s trepidation over Washington’s renewed interest in Asia was fleshed out in January 2012 by outgoing President Hu Jintao. Writing in Seeking Truth, a magazine that serves as a platform for bedrock Communist Party principles, he said: “We must clearly see that international hostile forces are intensifying the strategic plot of Westernizing and dividing China, and ideological and cultural fields are the focal areas of their long-term infiltration.”

中国的恼怒可以从一场文化战争中看出。美国和苏联曾有过冷战，现在华盛顿和北京正在争夺软实力。首先，中国对谷歌公司的搜索引擎发起了攻击。现在，这场战争的目标更大、更有生命力--从西方的蚕食中拯救中国人的灵魂。这是新的文化大革命吗？不完全是；但即将卸任的胡锦涛主席在 2012 年 1 月的一篇文章中明确阐述了中国对华盛顿重新关注亚洲的担忧。他在《求是》杂志上写道："我们必须清醒地认识到，国际敌对势力对中国的威胁是巨大的："我们必须清醒地看到，国际敌对势力正在加紧实施西化、分化中国的战略图谋，意识形态和文化领域是其长期渗透的重点领域。



While partly an effort to shore up support for Hu’s government by appealing to sentimental nationalism, the article’s timing was no coincidence, coming just six weeks after Obama visited Asia with big plans, including a deployment of troops in northern Australia. China clearly got the memo. Obama’s Asian shift was solidified at the November 19–20, 2012, East Asia Summit in Bali. There, maritime security and territorial disputes in the South China Sea and East China Sea were up for discussion in ways that irked China to no end. All the talk of China expanding its soft power is met with skepticism when the topic of claims to the resource-rich waters of the Asian seas comes up. The issue encapsulates why many leaders in Asia welcome America’s return and view China’s assumptions, ambitions, and ever-expanding territorial claims with wariness.

虽然这篇文章的部分目的是通过迎合感伤的民族主义来加强对胡锦涛政府的支持，但文章发表的时机绝非巧合，就在奥巴马带着包括在澳大利亚北部部署军队在内的大计划访问亚洲仅六周之后。中国显然收到了备忘录。2012 年 11 月 19 日至 20 日在巴厘岛举行的东亚峰会巩固了奥巴马的亚洲转变。会上讨论了南海和东海的海上安全和领土争端问题，其方式令中国大为恼火。当谈到对资源丰富的亚洲海域的主权要求时，所有关于中国扩大软实力的言论都遭到了怀疑。这个问题概括了为什么许多亚洲领导人欢迎美国的回归，而对中国的假设、野心和不断扩大的领土要求持警惕态度。



China tends to have little time for the sensitivities of governments from Vietnam to the Philippines to Malaysia—and especially Japan. This attitude fuels perceptions of a China convinced that its interpretation of history matters most, be it disputed claims to tiny islands hundreds of miles from its shores, the motivation behind its sizable military buildup, or the fate of 23 million Taiwanese governed by a democratically elected president.

从越南到菲律宾，再到马来西亚，尤其是日本，中国往往无暇顾及各国政府的敏感问题。这种态度助长了人们对中国的看法，即中国深信自己对历史的解释才是最重要的，无论是对距其海岸数百英里的小岛的争议主张、大规模军事集结背后的动机，还是由民选总统统治的 2300 万台湾人的命运。



There’s little doubt over China’s trajectory. Barring a major crisis, China’s economy might surpass that of the United States by the end of this decade. Yet there’s great debate about the merits of China’s belief that world hegemony is its due and that small economies should pay it tribute with undying loyalty and natural resources while an undervalued yuan hurts them economically.

中国的发展轨迹毋庸置疑。如果不发生重大危机，到本十年末，中国的经济总量可能会超过美国。然而，中国认为世界霸权是它应得的，小经济体应向它致敬，向它献上不朽的忠诚和自然资源，而低估的人民币却在经济上伤害了它们，对于这一信念的利弊，人们争论不休。



The bottom line is that anyone who thinks the power shift from the United States to China will go smoothly is dreaming. Just look at how the shift from Japan to China is unfolding. Possible flash points are currencies trading, intellectual property rights, climate change, military spending, North Korea, scarce global resources, human rights, control over cyberspace, Beijing’s coddling of rogue regimes, and China’s vast holdings of U.S. Treasuries. China is also increasing its rhetoric during American elections.

归根结底，任何认为美国向中国的权力转移会一帆风顺的人都是在做梦。看看日本向中国的权力转移是如何展开的就知道了。可能的爆发点包括货币交易、知识产权、气候变化、军费开支、朝鲜、全球稀缺资源、人权、对网络空间的控制、北京对流氓政权的纵容以及中国持有的大量美国国债。在美国大选期间，中国也在增加其言论。



China can learn from Japan’s failure to garner more soft power. If China wants to enhance its soft power, then it should use its influence to rein in Kim Jong-un in Pyongyang and Iran’s saber rattling over the Strait of Hormuz. President Xi should accelerate the rise in the yuan and play by international rules of commerce, not bending the World Trade Organization to China’s benefit at the expense of everyone else.

中国可以从日本未能获得更多软实力的失败中吸取教训。如果中国想要增强软实力，那么它就应该利用自己的影响力来遏制平壤的金正恩和伊朗在霍尔木兹海峡的剑拔弩张。习主席应该加速人民币升值，遵守国际商业规则，而不是为了中国的利益而牺牲其他国家的利益，屈从于世界贸易组织。



The United States must do its part, too. It’s no longer in a position to lecture Asia the way Bill Clinton’s White House did. The 2008 financial crisis and the Iraq war before it did great damage to the American brand and sapped its economic power. The United States must leave the arrogance of the past at the door as it reenters Asia. This return must go beyond appearances and be a genuine partnership. As China tries to extend its sway in Asia, the United States must realize that its own regional ambitions need some polishing, too.

美国也必须尽自己的一份力量。美国再也不能像比尔-克林顿的白宫那样教训亚洲了。2008年的金融危机和之前的伊拉克战争对美国的品牌造成了巨大的损害，并削弱了其经济实力。美国在重返亚洲时必须抛弃过去的傲慢。这种回归必须超越表面现象，成为真正的伙伴关系。当中国试图扩大其在亚洲的影响力时，美国必须意识到其自身的地区野心也需要一些打磨。



But really, this is up to Abe, Xi, and Park. What the latter two leaders can learn from Abe and his party is this: A leader should guide his or her people toward more enlightened engagement with neighbors rather than follow his base nationalist instincts. For too many years, and with way too many governments, Japan has been reluctant to get a grip on its isolationists and fully join the Asian community. Here, just like the economy, inertia isn’t a viable policy.

但实际上，这取决于安倍、习近平和朴槿惠。后两位领导人可以从安倍和他的政党身上学到以下几点：领导人应该引导自己的人民与邻国进行更开明的接触，而不是追随其基本的民族主义本能。多年来，在太多的政府中，日本一直不愿摆脱孤立主义，完全加入亚洲社会。在这方面，就像经济一样，惰性不是可行的政策。



Japan, China, and Korea must act to get a grip on these tensions. Sitting back and letting things escalate by the day imperils Asia’s outlook. Asia should be signing free-trade agreements; linking stock markets and bond markets; harmonizing immigration, tax, and accounting standards; and discussing what to do with the trillions of dollars of U.S. Treasuries sitting unproductively on government balance sheets. None of that is possible as Asia’s past gets in the way of what should be a prosperous and peaceful future.

日本、中国和韩国必须采取行动，控制这些紧张局势。坐视事态日益升级，将危及亚洲的前景。亚洲应该签署自由贸易协定；将股票市场和债券市场联系起来；协调移民、税收和会计标准；讨论如何处理政府资产负债表上无益的数万亿美元美国国债。由于亚洲的过去阻碍了本应繁荣与和平的未来，所有这些都不可能实现。



Things are tense enough in North Asia as China, Japan, and Korea fight over tiny islands, and Kim Jong-un rattles his saber in Pyongyang. The last thing the region needs is another controversy getting in the way of a trade relationship worth hundreds of billions of dollars in such a chaotic global environment. If Abenomics is to guide Japan down a more prosperous path, Abe’s team must leave the nationalism at the door.

北亚局势已经够紧张了，中国、日本和韩国为争夺小岛而大打出手，金正恩在平壤也剑拔弩张。在如此混乱的全球环境中，该地区最不需要的就是另一场争论来阻碍价值数千亿美元的贸易关系。如果安倍经济学要引导日本走上更加繁荣的道路，安倍团队就必须将民族主义拒之门外。



“Japan as a security partner in the twenty-first century cannot afford to be saddled with the past through the rubric of denial,” said Australian National University’s Kersten. “Moreover, Japan’s neighbors cannot afford to be seen to encourage historical revisionism in Japan. Abe’s narrow vision of contemporary patriotism is effectively working against Japan’s national interest.”

"澳大利亚国立大学的克尔斯滕说："日本作为二十一世纪的安全伙伴，不能以否认历史为借口而背上历史包袱。"此外，日本的邻国也不能鼓励日本的历史修正主义。安倍对当代爱国主义的狭隘看法实际上有损日本的国家利益。





Chapter 7

Will Abenomics Save the World?

第7章 安倍经济学能否拯救世界？





Three weeks into his campaign to end deflation, Abe received an unexpected herogram from one of the world’s most famous economists: Nobel laureate Paul Krugman. The Princeton University professor carries quite a megaphone in the form of his New York Times column. And in a January 13, 2013, piece, Krugman bemoaned the “dismal orthodoxy” of austerity plaguing governments around the globe, a dynamic that he argued was prolonging the global recession. “But now,” he wrote, “it seems that one major nation is breaking ranks, and that nation is, of all places, Japan.” If successful, Krugman said, “something remarkable may be about to happen: Japan, which pioneered the economics of stagnation, may also end up showing the rest of us the way out.”

安倍晋三在结束通货紧缩三周后，意外地收到了世界上最著名的经济学家之一发来的贺信：他就是诺贝尔经济学奖得主保罗-克鲁格曼。这位普林斯顿大学的教授以《纽约时报》专栏的形式拥有相当大的影响力。在 2013 年 1 月 13 日的一篇文章中，克鲁格曼对困扰全球各国政府的 "令人沮丧的正统 "紧缩政策表示遗憾，他认为这一政策延长了全球经济衰退的时间。"但现在，"他写道，"似乎有一个大国正在打破这种局面，这个国家就是日本。克鲁格曼说，如果成功，"一些了不起的事情可能就要发生了：日本作为停滞经济学的先驱，最终也可能为我们其他人指明出路。



Krugman’s statement was remarkable in itself; few dare hold Japan up as a model for how to run productive fiscal, monetary, or trade policies. Think of his suggestion as Japanization in reverse. Yet, 10 months later, Krugman seemed a bit less enamored with Abe’s handiwork. While Krugman said he’s “still moderately optimistic” in a November 14, 2013, interview with John Dawson of Bloomberg Television, making policies work is “difficult,” especially with sales taxes going up. “I’m really worried about that consumption-tax increase,” Krugman said. “They really need a psychological jolt and I’m crossing my fingers that what they’re doing is enough.”

克鲁格曼的发言本身就很引人注目；很少有人敢把日本作为如何实施富有成效的财政、货币或贸易政策的典范。可以把他的建议看作是日本化的反面教材。然而，10 个月后，克鲁格曼似乎对安倍晋三的手笔不那么着迷了。2013年11月14日，克鲁格曼在接受彭博电视台约翰-道森（John Dawson）的采访时表示，他 "仍然保持适度乐观"，但要让政策发挥作用 "很难"，尤其是在销售税上涨的情况下。"我真的很担心消费税的增加，"克鲁格曼说。"他们真的需要一个心理刺激，我在祈祷他们所做的已经足够了。"



This gets at a question economists of Krugman’s ilk don’t seem to be asking: How much has Japan learned from its lost decades? Has it sufficiently internalized what its policy makers did wrong, when they erred, and how to apply those lessons to their own reform process? It’s worth exploring before we address whether Abenomics is applicable more widely. The answer is no—Tokyo hasn’t learned enough of its own lessons.

这就涉及到一个克鲁格曼之流的经济学家似乎没有提出的问题：日本从失去的几十年中吸取了多少教训？日本是否已充分认识到其决策者做错了什么、何时犯错以及如何将这些经验教训应用于自身改革进程？在我们讨论安倍经济学是否适用于更广泛的国家之前，这个问题值得探讨。答案是否定的，东京还没有吸取足够的教训。



For all the buzz about status-quo-shaking reforms, bold ideas, and a revolution in competitiveness, Abenomics sure looks a lot like what Japan has been doing for 20 years now—just on a bigger scale and with a splashier marketing campaign. Since the early 1990s, Abe’s Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) has been building bridges, roads, tunnels, dams, and airports to nowhere and forcing the central bank to add ever more liquidity to the banking system, turning the BOJ into the glue holding Japan together. And what did those unimaginative policies leave their people with? The easy answer is the world’s highest ratio of debt to GDP. The harder one: Japan has become a nation that can’t proceed without the economic equivalent of a walker.

尽管安倍经济学大谈颠覆现状的改革、大胆的想法和竞争力革命，但它看起来确实很像日本 20 年来一直在做的事情--只是规模更大，营销活动更华丽而已。自 20 世纪 90 年代初以来，安倍领导的自民党一直在修建桥梁、道路、隧道、水坝和机场，迫使央行不断增加银行系统的流动性，将日本央行变成了支撑日本的粘合剂。这些缺乏想象力的政策给日本人民留下了什么？简单的答案是债务与国内生产总值的比率居世界首位。更难的答案是日本已经成为一个没有经济助行器就无法前进的国家。



That image takes on a deeper meaning when you consider Japan’s awful demographics and the dearth of ideas to cope with them. Take Finance Minister Taro Aso, who in January 2013 actually said elderly people should “hurry up and die” to relieve pressure on the government to pay for health care. Today, 26 percent of Japanese are 65 or over; by 2060, the proportion will swell to 40 percent.

如果考虑到日本糟糕的人口结构以及应对人口结构的想法匮乏，这一形象就会有更深刻的含义。就拿财务大臣麻生太郎来说，2013 年 1 月，他居然说老年人应该 "快点死"，以减轻政府的医疗支付压力。如今，日本有 26% 的人年龄在 65 岁或以上；到 2060 年，这一比例将上升到 40%。



So, is it really plausible that with just one more try of the same old remedies, Abe’s team will get the economy to walk on its own and then sprint ahead? Albert Einstein’s definition of insanity is repeating the same action over and over again, expecting a different result. One wonders if Japan is doing exactly that with its economy. No economist could formulate a credible list of every shot of stimulus and every dose of monetary steroids that officials have pumped into the economy since the early 1990s. There have been too many overlapping treatments to document. None of them, not a single one, achieved what investors are betting Abe will do this time: Make a Japanese recovery self-sustaining.

那么，安倍团队只需再试一次老办法，就能让经济自己走路，然后向前冲刺，这真的靠谱吗？阿尔伯特-爱因斯坦对 "精神错乱 "的定义是：一遍又一遍地重复同样的行为，却期望得到不同的结果。人们不禁要问，日本的经济是否正是如此。自 20 世纪 90 年代初以来，官员们向经济注入的每一针刺激剂和每一剂货币类固醇，没有经济学家能列出一份可信的清单。有太多重叠的处理方法需要记录。其中没有一项能达到投资者押注的安倍晋三这次要做的目标：让日本经济复苏能够自我维持。



“I think that the fiscal and monetary policy components are repeats of the past,” said the Brookings Institution’s Barry Bosworth. “The fiscal is not sustainable and will probably be reversed in the near future. There continues to be a lack of evidence in Japan or the United states that monetary QE programs have a major effect on the economy.”

"布鲁金斯学会的巴里-博斯沃思（Barry Bosworth）说："我认为，财政和货币政策部分是过去的重复。"财政政策是不可持续的，在不久的将来很可能会被逆转。日本和美国仍然缺乏证据表明货币量化宽松计划对经济产生了重大影响。



On the bright side, Bosworth said, “the sheer magnitude of the Japanese program did have a dramatic effect on the yen that I and others didn’t anticipate. It will have a positive impact on exports over the next two years that potentially could lift the growth rate by as much as one percent, but evidence is still out on that measure. But the important long-term component of Abenomics is regulatory reform because it has the potential to reenergize the domestic nontradables industries whose performance has been so weak.” Bosworth’s bottom line is this: “It’s not yet clear if it is more than just rhetoric or if they will really do something. Thus, I think the impact of the program is still unknowable.”

好的一面是，博斯沃思说，"日本计划的规模之大确实对日元产生了戏剧性的影响，这是我和其他人没有预料到的。它将在未来两年对出口产生积极影响，有可能将增长率提高多达 1%，但目前还没有证据证明这一点。但安倍经济学的重要长期组成部分是监管改革，因为它有可能为表现一直疲软的国内非贸易产业注入新的活力。博斯沃思的底线是博斯沃思的底线是："现在还不清楚这是否只是说说而已，或者他们是否真的会有所行动。因此，我认为该计划的影响仍是未知数"。



Also unknowable is how other economies would do if they veered Japan’s way economically. The United States is indeed displaying some Japan-like qualities: massive debt; falling wages; a central bank having trouble getting rates away from zero; monetary policy losing traction; and politicians preoccupied by petty turf battles while the economy burns—Japanization, indeed.

同样不可知的是，如果其他经济体在经济上与日本背道而驰，它们将如何发展。美国确实表现出了一些类似日本的特质：巨额债务；工资下降；中央银行难以使利率脱离零；货币政策失去牵引力；政客们只顾着争夺小地盘，而经济却在燃烧--这确实是日本化。



The thing about Japan’s funk is its genteel quality. Asset prices plunged, recession became the norm, companies morphed into zombies, banks went insolvent—and yet Japan never unraveled. Crime never surged, homelessness didn’t explode, London-like protests never materialized. Households merely adjusted and lived off their savings. Japan muddled along, even after the 2011 earthquake. Could the United States pull off such a feat? No economic growth for 20 years without mass social instability? I doubt it.

日本的困境在于它的温和。资产价格暴跌，经济衰退成为常态，公司蜕变为僵尸，银行破产，但日本从未解体。犯罪率从未激增，无家可归者人数也没有爆炸性增长，类似伦敦的抗议活动从未出现。家庭只是进行调整，靠储蓄过日子。即使是在2011年地震之后，日本也是得过且过。美国能完成这样的壮举吗？20年来经济没有增长，却没有大规模的社会动荡？我对此表示怀疑。



For all its troubles, and there are many, Japan has roughly $15 trillion of household savings sitting under tatami mats to cushion its people from a dismal economy. Highly indebted Americans couldn’t survive two months without a paycheck. Japan has been able to muddle along without disintegrating. So, is America about to mimic Japan if its economy falls and can’t get up? In some ways, it wishes it could.

日本的问题虽然很多，但它的榻榻米下有大约 15 万亿美元的家庭储蓄，这些储蓄可以帮助人们抵御糟糕的经济。债台高筑的美国人两个月不发工资都活不下去。日本却能浑然天成，没有解体。那么，如果美国的经济跌倒了爬不起来，美国会模仿日本吗？在某些方面，美国希望自己能做到。



Some long time observers make a convincing case for the Japan model, among them Irish journalist Eamonn Fingleton. His January 2012, New York Times op-ed, headlined “The Myth of Japan’s Failure,” generated such huge buzz that it prompted rebuttal from Krugman. Okay, so Fingleton’s 1995 book, Blindside: Why Japan Is Still on Track to Overtake the United States by the Year 2000, didn’t quite work out. In the Times piece, he made the case that Japan is still pretty close to a model society: incredibly safe, clean, efficient, predictable, and a consistently quirky place for an expatriate to reside. Japan is reasonably egalitarian (certainly compared to America), offers good air quality, enjoys universal literacy, boasts one of the highest standards of living, and has the longest life spans; its cities also feature the best infrastructure anywhere. On a more superficial level, Japanese cuisine arguably blows away all others and has an excess of Michelin stars to prove it.

一些长期观察家为日本模式提出了令人信服的理由，其中包括爱尔兰记者埃蒙-芬格尔顿。他在 2012 年 1 月发表的《纽约时报》专栏文章标题为 "日本失败的神话"，引起了巨大反响，以至于克鲁格曼对此进行了反驳。芬格尔顿在 1995 年出版了《盲点》一书：为什么日本仍有望在 2000 年之前超越美国》一书，但这本书并不成功。在《泰晤士报》的这篇文章中，他认为日本仍然非常接近于一个模范社会：令人难以置信的安全、整洁、高效、可预测性，而且对于外籍人士来说，日本始终是一个奇特的居住地。日本实行合理的平等主义（当然是与美国相比），空气质量良好，全民识字，是生活水平最高、寿命最长的国家之一；日本城市的基础设施也是世界上最好的。从更肤浅的层面来看，日本料理可以说是独步天下，米其林星级的数量也足以证明这一点。



Japan is really a tale of two nations. On the one hand, it can be an enviable place to live and work. On the other, it continually disappoints investors waiting for a sustainable rebound. Think of Charlie Brown, Lucy, and the football. Charles Schulz’s Peanuts cartoon has more to do with investors’ relationship with Japan than meets the eye. Time and time again, Lucy convinces Charlie she’ll hold the ball for him to kick only to yank it away at the last second. Every time, he lands flat on his back, pondering his gullibility. Bullishness on Japan often seems that way. Every few years, or every few prime ministers, investors rush back to Japan sensing that, this time, things really are different. They queue up to kick the ball and make some profits, only to see officials in Tokyo yank it away. Is this pattern playing out anew? Only time will tell. But if Japan disappoints investors once again, it could be a long time before they return.

日本实际上是两个国家的故事。一方面，它是一个令人羡慕的生活和工作场所。另一方面，它却不断让等待可持续反弹的投资者失望。想想查理-布朗、露西和橄榄球。查尔斯-舒尔茨（Charles Schulz）的《花生漫画》与投资者与日本的关系有更多的关联。露西一次又一次地说服查理，她会拿着球让他踢，却在最后一秒把球拽走。每一次，他都平躺在地上，思考着自己的轻信。日本的 "牛气 "常常是这样的。每隔几年，或者每隔几任首相，投资者就会匆忙返回日本，感觉这次情况真的不同了。他们排队踢球，想从中获利，结果却看到东京的官员把球踢走了。这种模式是否正在重演？只有时间才能证明。但如果日本再次让投资者失望，他们可能要过很长时间才能重返日本。



Abenomics, of course, is the most interesting animal Japan has seen in over a decade—as long as the prime minister makes good on the so-called third arrow. The problem is the quality of Japan’s growth. Since its asset bubble burst more than 20 years ago, policy makers have worked frantically to keep the postwar boom alive. For years, pundits fretted about Japan’s zombie companies. The real zombie is Japan’s economic playbook. The only reason Japan has any growth can be traced to its growing public debt, the world’s largest relative to the size of the economy, and the free money provided by the central bank. The economic equivalent of steroids is what holds Japan Inc. together, not its organic vitality.

当然，安倍经济学是日本十多年来最有趣的动物--只要首相能够兑现所谓的 "第三支箭"。问题在于日本经济增长的质量。自 20 多年前资产泡沫破灭以来，决策者们一直在疯狂地努力维持战后的繁荣。多年来，学者们对日本的僵尸企业忧心忡忡。真正的僵尸是日本的经济游戏规则。日本经济增长的唯一原因是其不断增长的公共债务（相对于经济规模而言，日本是世界上最大的公共债务国）以及中央银行提供的免费货币。支撑日本公司的是相当于类固醇的经济手段，而非其有机的生命力。



The aversion to change of any kind remains formidable, and therein lies the nation’s Achilles’ heel. The Olympus scandal showed how corporate cronyism safeguarded an insular old-boys club. The radiation leaking from the Fukushima Daiichi reactor was a reminder of how dangerously top-down Japan is in a bottom-up economic world. The Japanese media also are part of the problem. Change requires a vibrant and independent press policing leaders. Even before Abe’s secrecy law, Japan’s press was subject to a not-so-subtle form of control. If reporters get too enterprising and write stories government industries or companies don’t like—say, by questioning Tepco’s radiation readings—your press-club membership becomes vulnerable and sources dry up and advertising dollars evaporate, making it hard to be effective. So, most play along. But Abe’s obsession with controlling information may prove detrimental to Japan’s future.

对任何形式变革的反感仍然令人生畏，而这正是这个国家的致命弱点。奥林巴斯丑闻表明，企业裙带关系是如何维护一个封闭的老男孩俱乐部的。福岛第一核电站反应堆泄漏的辐射提醒人们，在一个自下而上的经济世界中，日本是多么危险的自上而下。日本媒体也是问题的一部分。变革需要一个充满活力、独立的媒体来监督领导人。甚至在安倍晋三颁布保密法之前，日本的新闻媒体就受到了一种并不明显的控制。如果记者过于进取，撰写政府部门或公司不喜欢的报道--比如质疑东京电力公司的辐射读数--那么你的新闻俱乐部会员资格就会变得脆弱，消息来源就会枯竭，广告费也会蒸发，从而难以发挥作用。因此，大多数人都会配合。但是，安倍对控制信息的痴迷可能会对日本的未来造成损害。



“The key lesson from the lost decades that Abe is ignoring is that the public desires and deserves transparency and accountability because citizens know that officials operating in the dark get up to no good,” Temple University’s Jeff Kingston said. “Giving bureaucrats the right to unilaterally bury inconvenient paper trails, and hide their misdeeds puts Abe in the position of being the getaway driver. If he doesn’t like democracy, and can’t respect the media’s and citizen’s freedoms and rights, he should get out of politics.”

"坦普尔大学的杰夫-金斯顿（Jeff Kingston）说："安倍忽视了从失去的几十年中得到的关键教训，那就是公众渴望并应该得到透明度和问责制，因为公民们知道，在黑暗中行事的官员是不会有好结果的。"让官僚们有权单方面掩盖不方便的文件线索，隐瞒他们的不法行为，这让安倍处于逃跑司机的位置。如果他不喜欢民主，不能尊重媒体和公民的自由和权利，那他就应该退出政治舞台"。



Japan probably could keep its head down and its sense of uniqueness intact for a few more years were it not for China. Japan is now an incredibly expensive property in a poor neighborhood. Yes, it will be decades before China matches Japan in per capita income, if it even can. Yet the competitive energy being unleashed by 1.3 billion incredibly industrious people means the status quo in Tokyo is no longer tenable. Deflationary forces are here to stay as developing Asia chips away at high-cost Japan’s market share and its prized egalitarianism.

如果没有中国，日本或许还能低调行事几年，保持其独特性。日本现在是穷人区里的一处昂贵房产。是的，如果中国的人均收入能与日本相提并论，那也要几十年之后。然而，13 亿无比勤劳的人所释放出的竞争能量意味着东京的现状已难以为继。随着亚洲发展中国家不断蚕食日本的高成本市场份额及其所珍视的平等主义，通货紧缩的力量将继续存在。



Investors trying to predict the next debt crisis after Europe’s tend to look to Washington or Beijing. What about Tokyo? Those betting against Japanese bonds haven’t made much on the trade. Yet, consider one inauspicious milestone reached in January 2012 when youngsters celebrated Coming of Age Day, donning kimonos, visiting temples, and partying the night away. Only 1.2 million Japanese turned 20, half as many as in 1970—a reminder that the population is shrinking as the national debt surges.

投资者在试图预测欧洲债务危机之后的下一次债务危机时，往往会将目光投向华盛顿或北京。那么东京呢？那些押注日本债券的投资者并没有在交易中赚到多少钱。然而，2012 年 1 月，日本迎来了一个不吉利的里程碑：年轻人庆祝成年日，穿上和服，参观寺庙，彻夜狂欢。只有 120 万日本人年满 20 岁，是 1970 年的一半--这提醒我们，随着国债激增，日本人口正在萎缩。



Boldness would be to set the stage for a reduction in government debt, or at least capping the increase. Admittedly, investors haven’t made much money betting against Japanese government bonds. But Takeshi Fujimaki, a former adviser to billionaire George Soros, is bracing for a fiscal crisis sometime before the Tokyo Olympics. That risk drove him recently to run for an upper house of parliament seat, which he won. “I decided to become a politician because I think financial crisis will come sooner or later,” Fujimaki said. “This total debt will continue to increase. I don’t think Japan can survive until 2020.”

大胆的做法是为减少政府债务或至少限制债务增长创造条件。诚然，投资者押注日本政府债券并没有赚到多少钱。但亿万富翁乔治-索罗斯（George Soros）的前顾问藤卷武（Takeshi Fujimaki）正在为东京奥运会前的某个时候发生财政危机做准备。这种风险促使他最近开始竞选议会上院议员，并最终获胜。"藤卷说："我之所以决定从政，是因为我认为金融危机迟早会到来。"债务总额将继续增加。我认为日本不可能活到 2020 年。



Japan’s debt is approaching 250 percent of GDP. The nation will spend 22.2 trillion yen servicing its debt in the fiscal year begun in April 2013, accounting for more than half of total tax revenue and occupying about 24 percent of the government’s budget. As yields rise, though, debt-servicing costs will skyrocket and spook markets.

日本的债务已接近国内生产总值的 250%。在 2013 年 4 月开始的财政年度，日本将花费 22.2 万亿日元偿还债务，占税收总额的一半以上，约占政府预算的 24%。不过，随着收益率的上升，偿债成本也将飙升，令市场恐慌。



“Because the BOJ is buying huge amounts of JGBs, market principles in this country do not work,” Fujimaki said. “Monetary easing is creating a JGB bubble. Sooner or later the market will reflect credit risk.”

"Fujimaki说："由于日本央行正在购买大量的日本国债，这个国家的市场原则不起作用。"宽松货币政策正在制造日本国债泡沫。市场迟早会反映出信贷风险。



Noriko Hama of Doshisha University harbors similar concerns. “The Bank of Japan is no longer functioning as a proper central bank,” Hama said, referring to the BOJ’s ever-increasing bond purchases. “The scariest scenario, and the one we should be most wary of, is a bottomless crash in the yen” as the global financial community loses faith in the currency.

同志社大学的 Noriko Hama 也有类似的担忧。"在谈到日本央行不断增加的债券购买时，Hama 说："日本央行已不再是一家合格的中央银行。"随着全球金融界对日元失去信心，"最可怕的情况，也是我们最应该警惕的情况，就是日元无休止的暴跌。



This really is a time when there are no experts. There are no wise old graybeards to turn to for wisdom. Books by Adam Smith and John Maynard Keynes are of little help to governments walking an unprecedented tightrope between too much debt and too many old people. That doesn’t mean Japan’s experience can’t inform Fed Chairman Janet Yellen and Treasury Secretary Jack Lew. One lesson, of course, is not to do any harm. Japan acted too slowly to dispose of bad loans. Politicians complicated things with an ill-timed tax increase in 1997 and didn’t begin recapitalizing banks until a year later or writing down bad loans until years after that. Another lesson: Know when to begin dismantling stimulus programs. Of course, in both of these cases Japan hasn’t learned the lessons from Japan.

这确实是一个没有专家的时代。没有睿智的白发老人可以向他们寻求智慧。亚当-斯密（Adam Smith）和约翰-梅纳德-凯恩斯（John Maynard Keynes）的著作对于在过多债务和过多老人之间走着前所未有的钢丝的政府来说帮助不大。但这并不意味着日本的经验不能为美联储主席珍妮特-耶伦（Janet Yellen）和财政部长杰克-卢（Jack Lew）提供借鉴。当然，一个教训就是不要造成任何伤害。日本处理不良贷款的行动过于缓慢。政治家们在 1997 年不合时宜地增税，使问题复杂化，直到一年后才开始对银行进行资本重组，或在几年后才开始减记不良贷款。另一个教训是：要知道何时开始取消刺激计划。当然，在这两个案例中，日本都没有吸取教训。



“Japan has never really resolved the overinvestment orgy of the 1980s,” said Michael Pettis, a finance professor at Peking University. “Instead of writing down bad debt, it effectively transferred much of it to the government balance sheet, and now this huge debt burden is itself becoming, I think, a constraint on the success of policies designed by Tokyo to spur growth.”

"北京大学金融学教授迈克尔-佩蒂斯（Michael Pettis）说："日本从未真正解决过 20 世纪 80 年代的过度投资狂欢。"日本没有减记坏账，而是有效地将大部分坏账转移到了政府的资产负债表上，而现在，我认为，这一巨大的债务负担本身正在成为东京旨在刺激经济增长的政策取得成功的制约因素。



The United States must avoid that mistake. Only time will tell if it can find the exit strategy from extreme monetary stimulus that eludes Japan. In fact, anyone worried about the Yellen Fed shaking the world with a series of big interest-rate hikes should spare a thought for Toshihiko Fukui. Bank of Japan governor from 2003 to 2008, Fukui was the last central banker to attempt a tapering process akin to the one Bernanke launched in December 2013. In 2005, Fukui began scaling back on massive bond purchases amid signs growth was perking up, and by March 2006 he scrapped Japan’s quantitative-easing program. In July of that year, he raised the benchmark rate above zero for the first time since 2000 and followed that 25 basis-point move with another in February 2007.

美国必须避免这一错误。只有时间才能证明美国能否找到日本所没有的退出极端货币刺激政策的策略。事实上，任何担心耶伦美联储通过一系列大幅加息来震撼世界的人都应该想到福井俊彦。福井是日本央行2003年至2008年的行长，也是最后一位尝试类似伯南克2013年12月启动的缩减进程的央行行长。2005 年，福井开始缩减大规模债券购买，因为有迹象表明经济增长正在加快，到 2006 年 3 月，他取消了日本的量化宽松计划。同年 7 月，他自 2000 年以来首次将基准利率上调至零以上，并在 2007 年 2 月再次上调 25 个基点。



Things didn’t go well. Japan’s deflationary economy quickly worsened anew and short-term rates were back at zero. When Masaaki Shirakawa succeeded Fukui in April 2008, his first act was to resurrect Japan’s QE experiment. And, of course, Haruhiko Kuroda has taken things to unprecedented extremes since arriving at BOJ in March 2013. Japan’s experience shows why markets may have less to fear from the Fed than many believe. The lesson from Tokyo is that it’s a lot easier to slash rates to zero and beyond than returning them to normal.

事情并不顺利。日本的通货紧缩经济很快再次恶化，短期利率又回到了零。2008 年 4 月，白川方明接替福井，他的第一件事就是恢复日本的量化宽松试验。当然，黑田东彦自2013年3月就任日本央行行长以来，也将事情推向了前所未有的极端。日本的经验表明，为什么市场对美联储的恐惧可能比许多人认为的要小。东京的教训是，将利率降至零或更低，比恢复正常利率要容易得多。



Japan is now on its sixth central bank governor since its asset bubble burst in 1990, and BOJ governors are still doubling and tripling down on QE. Janet Yellen is likely to fare no better as she inherits the unenviable task of exiting the Fed’s ultralow rate regime. Why? As Japan demonstrates, entire economies tend to get hooked on free money. Sure, folks complain publicly about irresponsible policies and currency debasement, but bankers, investors, and politicians alike become reliant on excessive liquidity—especially in nations carrying huge debt loads. So go ahead and brace for a brutal few years of Fed normalization and financial sobriety as Yellen & Co. yank away the punchbowl. More likely, the Fed will be forced to leave the bar open indefinitely.

自 1990 年资产泡沫破灭以来，日本现已迎来第六位央行行长，但日本央行行长们仍在加倍或三倍地实施量化宽松政策。珍妮特-耶伦（Janet Yellen）可能也不会好到哪里去，因为她要继承退出美联储超低利率制度的艰巨任务。为什么？正如日本所证明的那样，整个经济体往往会迷恋上免费货币。当然，人们会公开抱怨不负责任的政策和货币贬值，但银行家、投资者和政客都会依赖过度的流动性--尤其是在背负巨额债务的国家。因此，请做好准备，迎接美联储正常化和金融清醒的残酷的几年，因为耶伦和公司会把酒杯拽走。更有可能的是，美联储将被迫无限期地开放酒吧。



In economic circles, no slight stings more than being compared to Herbert Hoover. The thirty-first U.S. president, who helped make the Depression of the 1930s great, ranks among history’s worst growth killers. Ryutaro Hashimoto, Japan’s prime minister from 1996 to 1998, went to his deathbed in 2006 seething over being tagged as Asia’s Hoover. Among those doing the labeling was former Sony chairman Norio Ohga. Hashimoto’s crime was the same as Hoover’s: an ill-timed and ill-advised tax increase that ended Japan’s post-bubble recovery. Hashimoto may soon have company in the annals of Hooveresque economics. Japan okayed a doubling of the sales tax in two steps—8 percent from 5 percent starting in April 2014, with a further 2 percent increase in the cards for 2015.

在经济界，没有什么比被拿来与赫伯特-胡佛相提并论更刺痛人心的了。这位美国第三十一任总统帮助美国度过了 20 世纪 30 年代的大萧条，是历史上最糟糕的经济增长杀手之一。1996 年至 1998 年担任日本首相的桥本龙太郎在 2006 年临终前对被贴上 "亚洲胡佛 "的标签耿耿于怀。被贴上标签的人包括索尼前董事长大贺典雄。桥本的罪行与胡佛如出一辙：不合时宜、不明智的增税政策终结了日本泡沫经济后的复苏。在胡佛式经济学的史册上，桥本可能很快就会有一个同伴。日本批准从 2014 年 4 月起分两步将销售税从 5% 提高到 8%，翻了一番，并计划在 2015 年再提高 2%。



Never mind that deflation is still ingrained, the population is shrinking, and the ranks of the working poor are swelling. The government says higher taxes are needed to pay down the nation’s debt. Some politicians are praising Abe for bold leadership, but raising taxes on a population traumatized by two decades of economic drift and 2011’s earthquake is taking the easy road. It’s a quick fix that’s likely to backfire and erase the little dynamism that’s left in an economy that has been overtaken by China.

别忘了，通货紧缩仍然根深蒂固，人口正在萎缩，工作穷人的队伍正在扩大。政府表示，需要提高税收来偿还国家债务。一些政界人士称赞安倍晋三具有大胆的领导能力，但对饱受二十年经济沉浮和 2011 年地震创伤的民众增税是一种轻而易举的做法。这是一种急功近利的做法，很可能适得其反，抹杀被中国赶超的经济所剩无几的活力。



True leadership would be to undertake major reforms. Japan’s problem is less the size of the debt than the absence of healthy growth since the early 1990s. If the government were to lead, it would tell farmers—and other narrow special-interest groups stopping Japan from signing job-creating free-trade agreements like the Trans-Pacific Partnership—to go away. It would spend less time coddling Japan’s nuclear industry and more championing energy alternatives to the dangerous reactors in the nation’s midst. A green revolution would fuel an employment boom. Leadership also would have politicians pushing for increased immigration. Never mind that homogeneous Japan doesn’t think it’s ready to open its borders; economic reality makes it a necessity, not a choice.

真正的领导应该是进行重大改革。日本的问题与其说是债务规模，不如说是自 20 世纪 90 年代初以来缺乏健康的经济增长。如果政府要发挥领导作用，就应该让农民和其他阻止日本签署跨太平洋伙伴关系等创造就业的自由贸易协定的狭隘特殊利益集团滚蛋。政府将减少对日本核工业的溺爱，而更多地支持替代能源，以取代国内危险的反应堆。绿色革命将推动就业繁荣。领导力也会让政治家们推动增加移民。别忘了，同质化严重的日本并不认为自己已经做好了开放边境的准备；经济现实使其成为一种必然，而非一种选择。



If politicians really wanted to lead Japan’s economic revival, they would demand that companies become more shareholder-friendly and accountable and offer incentives for executives to hire more women as full-time staff and senior leadership, ending the neglect of half the country’s most valuable resource. Leadership would have lawmakers devising ways for women to manage both a career and a family, including more affordable child care and lower taxes for couples having babies.

如果政治家们真的想要领导日本的经济复兴，他们就会要求公司对股东更加友好，更加负责任，并为高管提供激励措施，雇用更多女性作为全职员工和高级领导，结束对国家一半最宝贵资源的忽视。领导层会让立法者为女性设计兼顾事业和家庭的方法，包括提供更多负担得起的托儿服务和降低生育夫妇的税收。



Gender is perhaps the clearest example of why Abenomics is more PR than reality. Consider that even what passes for good news for Japanese women is often bad. A November 2013 government survey found that the labor participation rate among women ages 15 to 64 hit a record 63 percent. That was billed as an early victory for Abe’s drive to pull women into the workforce. The details of the Internal Affairs and Communications Industry’s findings told a darker story: Most of these women are being pushed into part-time and temporary positions that pay less, offer few benefits, and provide no job security. In other words, corporate Japan is still using women as Band-Aids to fix today’s staffing needs, rather than harnessing their talents to increase productivity and innovation as recommended by IMF head Christine Lagarde.

性别问题也许是安倍经济学公关大于现实的最明显例证。对日本女性来说，即使是好消息也往往是坏消息。2013 年 11 月的一项政府调查发现，15 至 64 岁女性的劳动参与率达到了创纪录的 63%。这被认为是安倍晋三推动女性加入劳动力大军的早期胜利。总务省调查结果的细节却揭示了一个更黑暗的故事：这些女性中的大多数都被推向了兼职和临时职位，这些职位工资低、福利少，而且没有工作保障。换句话说，日本企业仍在把女性当作创可贴来解决当前的人员需求，而不是像国际货币基金组织总裁克里斯蒂娜-拉加德所建议的那样，利用她们的才能来提高生产力和创新能力。



This dynamic could worsen Japan’s prospects. The wage increases needed to make Abenomics a success aren’t materializing, in part because companies are using women to reduce total payroll costs. Abe talks a great deal about deregulating industry and lowering trade barriers but much less about increasing immigration to offset a shrinking labor force. Instead, women end up filling those jobs: Almost 57 percent of working women now hold part-time and temporary positions with salaries heading down rather than up.

这种态势可能会恶化日本的前景。安倍经济学取得成功所需的工资增长并没有实现，部分原因是企业正在利用女性来降低总工资成本。安倍晋三大谈放松行业管制和降低贸易壁垒，却很少提及增加移民以抵消劳动力的萎缩。相反，妇女最终填补了这些工作岗位：近 57% 的职业女性现在担任兼职和临时职位，工资不升反降。



It’s a trend that gets lost in translation overseas, as United States Vice President Joe Biden can attest. On December 3, Biden and American Ambassador Caroline Kennedy visited DeNA Co., a Japanese Internet company founded by a woman who does a better job than most of taking the female workforce seriously. There, Biden approached five women and asked, “Do your husbands like you working full-time?” The “gaffe” was treated as big news by the Washington Post and Wall Street Journal and became prime-time fodder for talk radio and CNN. In a Crossfire segment, Newt Gingrich accused Biden of offending Japan and waging a “war on women” of the kind usually associated with his Republican Party. “How do you explain Biden’s inability to stay in touch with reality?” Gingrich asked.

美国副总统乔-拜登（Joe Biden）可以证明，这种趋势在海外的翻译中会被遗忘。12 月 3 日，拜登和美国驻日本大使卡罗琳-肯尼迪访问了日本一家互联网公司 DeNA Co.在那里，拜登走近五位女性，问道："你们的丈夫喜欢你们全职工作吗？这一 "口误 "被《华盛顿邮报》和《华尔街日报》视为大新闻，并成为脱口秀电台和 CNN 的黄金时段素材。在 "交火 "节目中，纽特-金里奇指责拜登冒犯了日本，发动了一场 "对妇女的战争"，而这种战争通常与他所在的共和党有关。"你如何解释拜登无法与现实保持联系？金里奇问道。



Sadly, Biden is completely in touch with the reality of half of Japan’s population people. The real disgrace, Gingrich’s ignorance aside, is how little is changing for Japanese women even under a prime minister who has pledged to empower them as never before. Now, there’s reason to think institutionalized sexism is undercutting Abe’s plan to end deflation. There also are fresh reasons to lament how maddeningly low the bar is for Japan’s women. Consider the supposed female-empowerment model Biden’s handlers chose for him to tour with to highlight gender equality. Yes, DeNA was founded by a woman, Tomoko Namba, but it’s run by a male chief executive officer (CEO), a male chairman, and male chief financial and technology officers. Namba is the only woman on the board of a company whose workforce is 80 percent male. It’s not a place Gloria Steinem would probably celebrate, but in male-dominated Japan, it counts as a trailblazer.

可悲的是，拜登完全不了解日本一半人口的现实。撇开金里奇的无知不谈，真正的耻辱在于，即使是在一位承诺赋予女性前所未有的权力的首相领导下，日本女性的状况也没有发生什么变化。现在，我们有理由认为制度化的性别歧视正在削弱安倍结束通货紧缩的计划。我们也有新的理由感叹，日本女性的门槛低得令人发指。拜登的幕僚们为他选择了一个所谓的女性赋权模式，与他一起巡回演讲以强调性别平等。没错，DeNA 是由女性难波智子（Tomoko Namba）创立的，但它的首席执行官（CEO）是男性，董事长是男性，首席财务官和技术官也是男性。难波是这家公司董事会中唯一的女性，而公司员工中 80% 都是男性。虽然这不是格洛丽亚-斯泰纳姆（Gloria Steinem）会为之庆贺的地方，但在男性占主导地位的日本，它也算得上是一个开拓者。



American pundits can giggle all they want at Biden’s “awkward question,” as the Internet news site BuzzFeed called it. But it’s the right one. The graybeards who run Japanese companies—fewer than 1 percent of CEOs here are women—are stuck in a 1970s mind-set that women should work in supporting roles until they find a husband and quit. As many as 70 percent of Japanese women leave the workforce after having a child. Simply talking about tapping Japan’s most underutilized resource isn’t enough. Abe must redouble his efforts to change not only the structure of the economy but also the antiquated mind-sets that underpin it. Gingrich and his ilk can get away with cheap talking points—Abe can’t.

互联网新闻网站 BuzzFeed 称拜登的问题为 "尴尬的问题"，美国学者们可以尽情嘲笑拜登。但这是一个正确的问题。经营日本公司的灰头土脸们--这里只有不到 1% 的首席执行官是女性--还停留在 20 世纪 70 年代的思维定势中，认为女性应该做配角，直到找到丈夫并辞职为止。多达 70% 的日本女性在生完孩子后就离开了工作岗位。仅仅谈论开发日本最未得到充分利用的资源是不够的。安倍必须加倍努力，不仅要改变经济结构，还要改变支撑经济结构的陈旧思维模式。金里奇和他的同僚们可以用廉价的空谈搪塞过去，安倍却不行。



True audacity would mean nationalizing Tepco and commanding all resources to clean up Fukushima and invite international expertise. Real leadership would be to set a new national goal to promote English proficiency. Like it or not, English is the lingua franca of the Internet Age, not to mention the global economy. Twenty years ago, foreign executives had to do things Japan’s way—translators, ambiguous signals, the reluctance to offer a definitive “yes” or “no” to questions. Today, those executives have choices from Korea to China to Indonesia. Change means urging companies to rethink hiring practices. Students begin seeking lifetime employment in their junior year of college, or even their sophomore year. Fear of missing out on this recruitment process dissuades many from studying abroad or taking time off to travel before joining the ranks of the salarymen. It has created an odd generational quirk: Today’s young Japanese are often less international than their parents.

真正的胆识意味着将东京电力公司国有化，指挥所有资源清理福岛，并邀请国际专家。真正的领导力应该是制定新的国家目标，提高英语水平。无论你喜欢与否，英语都是互联网时代的通用语言，更不用说全球经济了。20 年前，外国高管不得不按照日本的方式行事--翻译、模棱两可的信号、不愿对问题给出明确的 "是 "或 "否"。如今，这些高管有了从韩国到中国再到印度尼西亚的选择。变革意味着敦促企业重新思考招聘方式。学生在大三，甚至大二就开始寻求终身就业。由于害怕错过这一招聘过程，许多人在加入工薪族行列之前都会选择出国留学或休学旅行。这就造成了一个奇怪的代际怪圈：今天的日本年轻人往往没有他们的父辈那么国际化。





Boldness means calling on companies to stop bellyaching about the yen’s value and learn to live with it. Japan’s currency has been strong for 12 years now—figure it out. Yes, those changes are being mulled right now. More and more companies are seeking cheap production overseas. Recent surveys show that large manufacturers are only modestly more upbeat amid Abe’s reform pledges.

大胆意味着呼吁企业停止对日元贬值的抱怨，学会与之共存。日本的货币已经强势了 12 年--想想吧。是的，这些变化目前正在酝酿之中。越来越多的公司正在寻求海外廉价生产。最近的调查显示，在安倍晋三的改革承诺下，大型制造商的乐观情绪略有上升。



Also, audacity would be to admit that Japan’s deflation may be more secular than cyclical. As Kuroda tries to spur Japan’s inflation rate, he faces a worrying question: What if his BOJ predecessor was right about why he will fail? In June 2011, then-Governor Shirakawa faced extreme pressure to double the monetary base, a step Kuroda took just days after replacing him in March 2013. When Shirakawa, a University of Chicago–trained economist, was asked why he had refused to budge, he offered a surprising excuse: Japan’s aging population, whose fixed incomes would be eaten away by rising prices. China, too, was placing downward pressures on costs everywhere, especially Japan. Politicians thought the rationale was a copout and Abe’s first act as prime minister was to dump Shirakawa.

此外，大胆承认日本的通货紧缩可能更多是世俗性的，而不是周期性的。当黑田东彦试图刺激日本的通货膨胀率时，他面临着一个令人担忧的问题：如果他的前任日本央行行长对他失败的原因的判断是正确的，那该怎么办？2011 年 6 月，时任行长白川方明面临着将货币基础扩大一倍的巨大压力，而黑田东彦在 2013 年 3 月接替白川方明后仅几天就采取了这一措施。当芝加哥大学经济学家白川被问及为何拒绝让步时，他给出了一个令人惊讶的借口：日本人口老龄化，物价上涨将吞噬他们的固定收入。中国也对各地的成本造成了下降压力，尤其是日本。政治家们认为这个理由是在逃避现实，安倍晋三作为首相的第一件事就是抛弃白川方明。



Turns out, Shirakawa was on to something. In a September 2013 paper, “Shock from Graying: Is the Demographic Shift Weakening Monetary Policy Effectiveness?,” IMF researcher Patrick Imam offered convincing evidence that aging societies in Japan, Germany, and, to some extent, the United States can no longer be manipulated so easily by central bank policies. Why is this so? Changes in official interest rates are about influencing long-term expectations and short-term behavior. Cutting rates is meant to make buying a new house, opening a business, splurging on a flat-screen TV, or betting on stocks more attractive today than next year. But such activity is disproportionately conducted by the young. That’s Japan’s problem. Today, Japan’s average life expectancy at birth is 83 years, a figure projected to exceed 90 for women by 2050.

事实证明，白川是有道理的。在 2013 年 9 月发表的论文《白发带来的冲击：国际货币基金组织（IMF）研究员帕特里克-伊曼（Patrick Imam）提供了令人信服的证据，证明日本、德国以及在某种程度上美国的老龄化社会不再那么容易被央行政策所操纵。为什么会这样呢？官方利率的变化是为了影响长期预期和短期行为。降低利率是为了让购买新房、开办企业、购买平板电视或押注股票在今天比明年更有吸引力。但是，年轻人从事此类活动的比例过高。这就是日本的问题所在。如今，日本人出生时的平均预期寿命为 83 岁，预计到 2050 年，女性的预期寿命将超过 90 岁。



Even that isn’t the whole story. Along with ugly demographics and China’s growing influence, Kuroda faces a Japanese public that has learned not only to live with deflation but also to enjoy it. Just as there is good inflation, though, many in Japan have benefited from good deflation. By 1990, asset prices weren’t the only things that had veered into bubble territory in Japan. Arguably, the entire economy had. As the 1970s gave way to the heady 1980s, costs surged throughout the economy: food, transportation, service fees, power, telecommunications, education, entertainment, apparel, you name it. The story of Japan these last 20 years, from the government to banks to companies, has involved keeping consumer prices steady. Deflation has acted like a stealth tax cut for households and restored some sobriety to costs.

即便如此，这也不是事情的全部。除了丑陋的人口结构和中国日益增长的影响力，黑田东彦面对的日本民众不仅学会了与通货紧缩共存，还学会了享受通货紧缩。就像通胀率高一样，许多日本人也从通货紧缩中受益。到 1990 年，日本进入泡沫领域的不仅仅是资产价格。可以说，整个经济都出现了泡沫。随着 20 世纪 70 年代进入繁荣的 20 世纪 80 年代，整个经济的成本都在飙升：食品、交通、服务费、电力、电信、教育、娱乐、服装等等，不一而足。在过去的 20 年里，日本从政府到银行再到公司，都在努力保持消费价格的稳定。通货紧缩就像对家庭的隐形减税，使成本恢复了一些清醒。



When economist Kosuke Motani made this argument in his 2010 book, The Real Face of Deflation, it fell with a mighty thud in Nagatacho. Motani thinks Japan is experiencing “nonmonetary deflation” on account of a national cost structure that overshot to the upside decades ago, a graying population that favors falling prices over rising ones, and a political system that doesn’t understand that deflation is a symptom of Japan’s malaise, not the cause. The theory among neoclassical economists that quantitative easing can overcome deflation, Motani argued, is “just like a religion.” He could as easily have said “cult.” In fact, as odd as it sounds, Japan’s deflation has been as much a choice as a punishment. In order to avoid big, destabilizing reforms, the government has amassed mountains of debt. Deflation, which lowers nominal bond yields, makes that burden easier to service.

当经济学家本谷康介在 2010 年出版的《通货紧缩的真实面目》一书中提出这一论点时，在长谷町引起了轩然大波。本谷认为，日本正在经历 "非货币性通货紧缩"，这是因为几十年前日本的国家成本结构过度上行，白发苍苍的人口更青睐价格下跌而非上涨，而且日本的政治体制不明白通货紧缩只是日本萎靡不振的症状，而非原因。莫塔尼认为，新古典经济学家认为量化宽松政策可以克服通货紧缩的理论 "就像宗教一样"。他也可以轻松地说 "邪教"。事实上，虽然听起来很奇怪，但日本的通货紧缩既是一种选择，也是一种惩罚。为了避免大刀阔斧、破坏稳定的改革，政府积累了堆积如山的债务。通货紧缩降低了债券的名义收益率，使政府更容易偿还债务。



That’s the paradox staring Abe and Kuroda directly in the face. Until now, the focus has been on how bond traders will react as Japan begins to produce sustained inflation. An equally important question is how the nation’s growing share of elderly will cope. “In Japan, all players have adapted to a deflationary environment: Households are used to increasing living standards without expecting higher wages, companies live off cost-cutting without fighting for bigger markets, the government needs low interest rates for most of its finance,” said Martin Schulz, a former BOJ researcher and now senior economist at Fujitsu Research Institute. “Turning all this around will not be easy.”

这就是安倍晋三和黑田东彦直面的悖论。迄今为止，人们关注的焦点一直是当日本开始产生持续通胀时，债券交易商将如何反应。一个同样重要的问题是，日本越来越多的老年人将如何应对。"在日本，所有参与者都已经适应了通货紧缩的环境：前日本央行研究员、现富士通研究所（Fujitsu Research Institute）高级经济学家马丁-舒尔茨（Martin Schulz）说。"扭转这一切并非易事。



Odd as it may sound to monetary purists, Japan’s deflation was more of a choice than an economic-gloom sentence. Economist Robert Feldman of Morgan Stanley MUFG Securities Co. explored how the decision, be it active or passive, evolved into reality policy in a September 2010 report. Feldman argued, for example, that Japan could have left deflation in the rearview mirror in 2006 but the national psyche intervened to keep consumer prices on the decline. He offered four explanations why.

对货币纯粹主义者来说，日本的通货紧缩听起来可能很奇怪，但它更像是一种选择，而不是经济景气的宣判。摩根士丹利 MUFG 证券公司的经济学家罗伯特-费尔德曼（Robert Feldman）在 2010 年 9 月的一份报告中探讨了这一主动或被动的决定是如何演变成现实政策的。费尔德曼举例说，日本本可以在 2006 年将通货紧缩抛诸脑后，但国民心理的干预却使消费价格持续下滑。他提出了四种解释。



First was a central bank that was too timid to establish an inflation target until it was too late. The economy was growing at a healthy pace in 2006, enjoying the supply-side policies of Junichiro Koizumi, prime minister from April 2001 to September of that year. It wasn’t until 2006 that the BOJ presented an actual definition of the “price stability” it was aiming for. And not until December 2009 did the government offer its own: a GDP deflator growth rate of 1 percent over time. But the Democratic Party of Japan in charge back then was reluctant to declare an explicit inflation target, or to change the BOJ’s charter to reflect such a goal.

首先是中央银行过于胆怯，直到为时已晚才确定通胀目标。2006 年，小泉纯一郎（2001 年 4 月至同年 9 月担任日本首相）的供给侧政策使日本经济以健康的速度增长。直到 2006 年，日本央行才提出了其目标 "物价稳定 "的实际定义。直到 2009 年 12 月，政府才提出了自己的定义：GDP 平减指数长期增长率为 1%。但当时掌权的日本民主党不愿宣布明确的通胀目标，也不愿修改日本央行章程以反映这一目标。



Second was demographics. Comparisons between Japan and the United States are dicey because the former is aging far more rapidly. Also, Japan’s aging masses have far greater political clout than young voters, especially those just starting out in the labor force. That means Japan’s entire societal structure, skewed toward savers, is incentivized to favor deflation. As Feldman pointed out, the working-age population (15–64) peaked in 1995 at 87.3 million and had fallen to 81.5 million by September 2010. At the same time, Japan’s graying contingent—those 65 and over—has jumped from 18.3 million to 29 million.

其次是人口结构。日本和美国之间的比较很危险，因为前者的老龄化速度要快得多。此外，日本老龄化群众的政治影响力远大于年轻选民，尤其是那些刚刚参加工作的选民。这意味着日本的整个社会结构偏向于储蓄者，这就促使其倾向于通货紧缩。正如费尔德曼所指出的，日本的劳动适龄人口（15-64 岁）在 1995 年达到顶峰，为 8730 万人，到 2010 年 9 月已降至 8150 万人。与此同时，日本的白发人群（65 岁及以上）从 1 830 万跃升至 2 900 万。



Third was an underappreciated generational divide. This dynamic is mostly thought of in terms of a strong yen, which benefits Japan’s growing ranks of the elderly at the expense of the young. The ruling Liberal Democratic Party that has led Japan virtually uninterrupted for nearly six decades has long relied on the support of rural—and in recent decades, rapidly aging—voters. LDP leaders have been reluctant to cross their base with a falling yen, especially with prime ministers often changing every 12 months or so.

第三是未被充分重视的代沟。人们大多从日元走强的角度来看待这一动态，认为日元走强有利于日本日益壮大的老年人队伍，但却牺牲了年轻人的利益。执政的自民党近六十年来几乎从未间断过对日本的领导，长期以来一直依赖于农村选民的支持--近几十年来，农村选民迅速老龄化。自民党领导人一直不愿在日元下跌的情况下动摇自己的基础，尤其是首相往往每 12 个月左右更换一次。



“The aging of Japan’s population has increased this tendency to favor deflation, because a large share of the population lives on fixed incomes,” Feldman wrote. “Yes, nominal interest income has fallen sharply with the drop of nominal interest rates. However, complaints about this have largely faded, as pensioners see the benefits of falling prices, relative to their fixed incomes.” The bottom line is that a legislative universe overrepresented by older voters is prone to adopt deflationary policies.

"费尔德曼写道："日本人口老龄化加剧了这种有利于通货紧缩的趋势，因为很大一部分人口靠固定收入生活。"是的，随着名义利率的下降，名义利息收入也急剧下降。然而，由于养老金领取者看到了相对于其固定收入而言价格下降所带来的好处，他们对此的抱怨在很大程度上已经消失了。底线是，老年选民占多数的立法机构容易采取通货紧缩政策。



Fourth was Japan’s obsession with current-account surpluses. This, too, skews incentives toward falling prices because it enables Tokyo to run large, and growing, budget deficits as a means of putting off major upgrades to the domestic economy. Deflation, it’s important to note, lowers nominal bond yields and makes large public debt loads easier to service. According to Feldman,

第四是日本对经常账户盈余的痴迷。这也是导致物价下跌的诱因，因为它使东京能够维持巨额且不断增长的预算赤字，以此来推迟国内经济的重大升级。值得注意的是，通货紧缩会降低名义债券收益率，使巨额公共债务更容易偿还。费尔德曼认为



Thus, the pressure for productivity-enhancing reforms, both in the public sector itself to contain spending and in the private sector to raise growth and tax revenue, was interdicted. So long as the current-account surplus remains, the incentives to exit deflation will be weak, barring wholesale capital flight by domestic investors, which appears very unlikely.

因此，无论是公共部门本身为控制支出而进行的提高生产力的改革，还是私营部门为提高增长和税收而进行的改革，都受到了抑制。只要经常账户盈余依然存在，摆脱通货紧缩的动力就会减弱，除非国内投资者大规模资本外逃，但这似乎不太可能。





One problem facing Abe and Aso is perceptions versus reality. Many Japanese love the idea of defeating deflation because it represents a break with the nation’s malaise. It irks the government, too, that Japanization is a catchphrase among economists warning about the evils of falling prices and political gridlock. Japanese yearn for a return to the days when they wowed the world with high-tech innovation, bullet trains, avant-garde stadiums, neon-lit skylines, and can-do spirit. But are they ready to see rents, utility bills, school costs, and the prices of taxi rides and bento boxes rise? Perhaps not.

安倍和麻生面临的一个问题是观念与现实的矛盾。许多日本人喜欢战胜通货紧缩的想法，因为这代表着摆脱国家的颓势。日本化是经济学家警告物价下跌和政治僵局弊端的口头禅，这也让政府感到不快。日本人渴望回到他们凭借高科技创新、子弹头列车、前卫的体育场、霓虹灯照亮的天际线和敢作敢为的精神令世界惊叹的时代。但是，他们准备好看到房租、水电费、学费以及出租车和便当的价格上涨了吗？也许还没有。



That’s why it’s so important that Abe implement the third “arrow” of his revitalization program. The first phase—Kuroda’s huge liquidity boost—cheered markets. The second, fiscal pump-priming, may get a boost from Tokyo’s preparations for the 2020 Olympics. The third and most vital, though, is deregulation to encourage companies to expand and fatten paychecks so consumers can spend more. Only phase three can help the BOJ’s largess get real traction on deflation.

这就是为什么安倍晋三必须实施其振兴计划的第三支 "箭"。第一阶段--黑田大幅增加流动性--令市场欢欣鼓舞。第二阶段是财政刺激，东京为 2020 年奥运会所做的准备可能会为这一刺激提供动力。第三阶段，也是最重要的阶段，是放松管制，鼓励企业扩张，增加工资收入，让消费者能够增加消费。只有第三阶段才能帮助日本央行的大手笔真正遏制通货紧缩。



“The only easy part is starting to print the money because it does not hurt anyone for the first year,” Schulz said.

"舒尔茨说："唯一容易的部分是开始印钱，因为第一年印钱不会对任何人造成伤害。



But after that, when prices start to go up, it really depends on the view at that time: Will people only see the higher costs, or will they see the brighter future that the government is selling with its money? If they don’t, a turn in public opinion will stop the BOJ before expectations have changed enough to get the economy on an inflationary track.

但在此之后，当物价开始上涨时，就真的要看当时的看法了：人们会只看到成本上升，还是会看到政府用钱兜售的美好未来？如果看不到，那么在人们的预期改变到足以让经济走上通胀轨道之前，公众舆论的转向就会阻止日本央行的行动。





Kuroda could yet prove his predecessor wrong, but he’s going to need help from his prime minister—and soon. Abe should work with the BOJ to devise more creative ways to get banks to lend. Wave after wave of central-bank liquidity isn’t resulting in the credit creation Japan needs to jump-start growth. Rather than tax consumers, why not tax banks that hoard cash? Why not force bankers to do their jobs and make loans? That might offset the effects of higher taxes. Japan also lacks a vibrant venture-capital industry. How about announcing a government-driven incubation campaign with lower corporate taxes for new companies? Okay, that would be anathema to economists from Adam Smith to Milton Friedman. But there’s a reason Japan is losing ground as scrappy startups and social-media offerings level the economic landscape. Japan Inc. still sees nothing wrong with most of its innovations and patents coming from huge companies, as opposed to Mark Zuckerberg types. That arrangement needs to change and if it comes from the government, so be it. The Facebook founder met with Japanese policy makers in Tokyo in late 2012, just as they were debating higher taxes. At that moment, Zuckerberg was on the cusp of his own bit of history: the Internet’s biggest initial public offering. The big difference, of course, is that as Zuckerberg is creating wealth, Japan’s leaders may be about to destroy it, Herbert Hoover–style.

黑田东彦可能会证明他的前任是错的，但他需要首相的帮助，而且要尽快。安倍应该与日本央行合作，设计出更具创造性的方法让银行放贷。一波又一波的央行流动性并没有为日本带来启动经济增长所需的信贷创造。与其向消费者征税，为什么不向囤积现金的银行征税呢？为什么不迫使银行家们做好本职工作并发放贷款呢？这或许能抵消提高税收的影响。日本还缺乏一个充满活力的风险投资行业。不如宣布一项由政府推动的孵化活动，降低新公司的企业税？好吧，这对从亚当-斯密到米尔顿-弗里德曼的经济学家来说都是大忌。但是，随着初创企业的崛起和社交媒体的兴起，日本的经济格局正在发生变化，这是有原因的。与马克-扎克伯格（Mark Zuckerberg）类型的公司相比，日本公司仍然认为其大部分创新和专利来自大公司并无不妥。这种安排需要改变，如果来自政府，那就改变吧。2012 年底，Facebook 创始人在东京会见了日本政策制定者，当时他们正在讨论提高税收的问题。在那一刻，扎克伯格正处于自己创造历史的风口浪尖：互联网上最大的首次公开募股。当然，最大的不同在于，当扎克伯格创造财富时，日本领导人可能正准备以赫伯特-胡佛（Herbert Hoover）式的方式摧毁财富。



Japan has seen bursts of entrepreneurial zeal before. One coincided with Silicon Valley’s dot-com boom in the late 1990s, when a commercial area in Tokyo’s trendy Shibuya district was dubbed “Bit Valley.” The euphoria fizzled as America’s Nasdaq bubble exploded and Japanese venture capital failed to materialize. Another came in the early 2000s amid excitement about the Koizumi government’s free-market policies. Yet it evaporated along with Livedoor Co.’s market capitalization when founder Takafumi Horie was locked up, ostensibly for securities fraud. For many would-be tech magnates, Horie’s downfall was a cautionary tale about how Japan Inc. pounces on a scrappy outsider who ignores its rules.

日本曾经爆发过创业热潮。上世纪 90 年代末，硅谷的网络公司蓬勃发展，东京时尚的涩谷商业区被称为 "比特谷"。随着美国纳斯达克泡沫的破灭，日本的风险投资也未能实现，这种欣喜情绪也随之消退。2000 年代初，在小泉政府的自由市场政策的刺激下，又出现了另一个泡沫。然而，当创始人堀江隆文（Takafumi Horie）表面上因证券欺诈而被关进监狱时，Livedoor 公司的市值也随之蒸发了。对于许多想成为科技巨头的人来说，堀江的下台是一个警示故事，告诉他们日本公司是如何扑向无视规则的外来者的。



Increased paper wealth, optimists argue, will provide more currency for prominent Japanese tech incubators like Samurai Startup Island or innovation consultants like Quantum Leaps Corp., which was founded by former Sony CEO Nobuyuki Idei. Yet it will take more than excitement to unleash Japan’s animal spirits. The government must facilitate the process with tax incentives, financial assistance, and help to encourage more risk taking in a deeply conservative corporate culture. Or will it be the Ronald Reagan moment Japan investors have long fantasized about? Abe’s plan to restore Japan’s economic might draws heavily upon principles long associated with the former U.S. president: welfare-spending cuts, debt-swelling tax reductions for the wealthy and corporations, deregulation, a lowering of trade barriers, and reforms that make it easier to fire workers. Yet while investors have greeted this supply-side shock therapy with enthusiasm, Japan’s people may not find its side effects quite so pleasing. As in the United States, Abe’s reforms could well hollow out the middle class and create the kind of gulf between rich and poor that Japan has long tried to avoid. Everyone from officials at the U.S. Treasury to punters in London trading pits to salarymen in Osaka are so ecstatic to see a Japanese leader acting boldly that they’ve forgotten to study his strategy. It’s great that Abe wants to shake Japan Inc. out of two decades of complacency. It’s equally important, though, that his fixes are the right ones and are implemented carefully.

乐观人士认为，纸面财富的增加将为武士创业岛（Samurai Startup Island）等知名日本科技孵化器或索尼前首席执行官出井伸之创办的量子飞跃公司（Quantum Leaps Corp.然而，要释放日本的动物精神，需要的不仅仅是兴奋。政府必须通过税收优惠和财政援助来推动这一进程，并帮助在保守的企业文化中鼓励更多的风险承担。或者，这会是日本投资者长期幻想的罗纳德-里根时刻吗？安倍恢复日本经济实力的计划在很大程度上借鉴了长期以来与这位美国前总统相关的原则：削减福利支出、为富人和企业减免债务、放松管制、降低贸易壁垒，以及使解雇工人更加容易的改革。然而，尽管投资者对这种供给方休克疗法充满热情，但日本人民可能不会觉得它的副作用如此令人愉悦。与美国一样，安倍的改革很可能会掏空中产阶级，造成日本长期以来一直试图避免的贫富差距。从美国财政部官员到伦敦交易市场的赌徒，再到大阪的工薪阶层，看到日本领导人大胆行事，都欣喜若狂，忘记了研究他的战略。安倍晋三想让日本公司摆脱二十年来的自满情绪，这很好。但同样重要的是，他的改革措施必须是正确的，而且要谨慎实施。



Take Abe’s plan to cut the 35.6 percent corporate tax rate—the second-highest level among Group of Seven nations—while at the same time doubling consumption taxes. How exactly does Japan hope to encourage households to spend more to boost gross domestic product while raising the cost of consuming? The last time Japan tried something similar, in 1998, tax increases scuttled the recovery from a financial crash eight years earlier. “To raise the consumption tax while cutting corporate taxes will further shift things in the wrong direction,” says Richard Katz of the Oriental Economist Report. “That does not make sense for a country where consumer spending is chronically weak due to weak consumer income.”

安倍晋三计划削减 35.6% 的企业税率，这一税率在七国集团中位居第二，同时将消费税提高一倍。在提高消费成本的同时，日本究竟希望如何鼓励家庭增加消费以提高国内生产总值？日本上一次尝试类似做法是在 1998 年，当时的增税政策破坏了八年前金融风暴后的经济复苏。"东方经济学家报告》的理查德-卡茨（Richard Katz）说："在削减企业税的同时提高消费税，将进一步使事情朝着错误的方向发展。"对于一个因消费者收入疲软而导致消费支出长期疲软的国家来说，这样做毫无意义。"



What would make more sense is clamping down on tax-dodging executives. An eye-popping 73 percent of companies in Japan pay no tax, according to Nicholas Smith of CLSA Asia-Pacific Markets. “This breaks into two groups—companies that are uneconomical and companies that are economical with the truth,” Smith said. Abe’s labor reforms pose risks, too. Japan should indeed scrap the antiquated practices of lifetime employment and seniority-based promotions while reducing the power of uncompromising labor unions. The country ranks 134th out of 144 nations in terms of ease of hiring and firing, according to the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Report. Yet Japan lacks a public safety net to catch the hundreds of thousands of workers who could soon be out of a job.

更有意义的是打击逃税的高管。据里昂证券亚太市场部的尼古拉斯-史密斯（Nicholas Smith）称，日本高达 73% 的公司没有纳税。"史密斯说："这就分成了两类公司--不经济的公司和隐瞒真相的公司。安倍的劳动改革也带来了风险。日本确实应该废除终身雇佣和论资排辈的陈旧做法，同时削弱不妥协的工会的力量。根据世界经济论坛的《全球竞争力报告》，就招聘和解雇的便利程度而言，日本在 144 个国家中排名第 134 位。然而，日本缺乏一个公共安全网来保护成千上万可能很快失业的工人。



Since the Koizumi years, Japan has seen a rapid increase in the number of workers being switched to part-time positions with few benefits; “freeters,” or low-wage workers going from temporary job to temporary job; “NEETs,” or young people not in education, employment, or training; and “parasite singles,” twentysomething and thirtysomething unmarried Japanese who live with Mom to save on costs.

自小泉时代以来，日本的工人数量迅速增加，他们被调换到福利很少的兼职岗位；"自由人"，即从一份临时工作到另一份临时工作的低工资工人；"NEET"，即没有接受教育、就业或培训的年轻人；以及 "单身寄生虫"，即 20 多岁和 30 多岁的未婚日本人，他们与妈妈住在一起以节省开支。



Japan eschewed an American-style unemployment-insurance system because companies never laid off workers. The reason Tokyo spent so much time and money propping up banks in the late 1990s and early 2000s was so they could keep zombie companies afloat and unemployment low. Before Abe helps companies to sack 20,000 workers here and 50,000 there, he must create a social-benefits program and fund extensive job-retraining programs. Otherwise, Abenomics will only exacerbate Japan’s underappreciated working-poor problem. Among OECD members, Japan ranks fifth in the number of working-age persons living on less than half the average national income. The dynamic began in former Prime Minister Koizumi’s day and accelerated with what Japanese call the “Lehman shock” in 2008. Government statisticians are only now catching on to the problem.

日本摒弃了美国式的失业保险制度，因为企业从不裁员。东京之所以在 20 世纪 90 年代末和 21 世纪初花费大量时间和金钱扶持银行，就是为了让僵尸企业继续生存下去，降低失业率。在安倍帮助企业在这里裁员 2 万、在那里裁员 5 万之前，他必须制定一项社会福利计划，并为广泛的就业再培训计划提供资金。否则，安倍经济学只会加剧日本未被重视的在业穷人问题。在经济合作与发展组织（OECD）成员国中，日本靠不到国民平均收入一半生活的劳动适龄人口数量排名第五。这种态势始于前首相小泉时代，并在日本人称之为 "雷曼冲击 "的 2008 年加速发展。政府统计人员现在才意识到这个问题。



Between 2001 and 2006, Koizumi dabbled a bit in Reaganomics himself. Japan’s preference for consensus over conflict meant he moved more gingerly than Reagan did, or than Margaret Thatcher did as Britain’s prime minister in the 1980s. Koizumi’s signature achievement was privatizing the sprawling Japan Post, which plans an initial public offering by April 2015. Yet Koizumi also cut pensions and tweaked labor laws to allow companies to hire more workers on a part-time basis at lower pay and without benefits. That slammed incomes in the middle of the wage spectrum and hit women especially hard. It’s led to many unexpected consequences, including an epidemic of shoplifting among the elderly. Abe’s move to get the Bank of Japan to double the monetary base excites hedge-fund managers but punishes savers who must live on a fixed income. These changes would be less destabilizing if trickle-down economics actually worked. It would help, too, if Japan had a buoyant startup industry creating scores of new jobs to fill the void. It’s still the case that Japan’s entrepreneurial animal spirits are dormant. Even if Abe complemented Reaganomics with a dash of socialism and financed a venture-capital industry publicly, it would take years to yield results. Many of Abe’s policies are exactly what Japan needs. Joining the U.S.-led Trans-Pacific Partnership would pump fresh energy through Japan Inc.’s atrophied veins. So would deregulating sectors from energy to medical services to education to agriculture. Yet reforms that should bear fruit in the long run lack the financial cushions and economic checks and balances needed in the short run. Abe must develop a transition plan to keep his strategy from polarizing Japan’s proudly egalitarian society. It’s not as if most Americans are happy with that legacy of Reaganomics.

2001 年至 2006 年间，小泉本人也对里根经济学有所涉猎。日本更倾向于达成共识而非冲突，这意味着他比里根或上世纪 80 年代英国首相撒切尔夫人行事更谨慎。小泉的标志性成就是将庞大的日本邮政私有化，该公司计划在 2015 年 4 月进行首次公开募股。然而，小泉也削减了养老金，并调整了劳动法，允许公司以低薪和无福利的方式雇佣更多兼职员工。这使得中等收入阶层的收入大打折扣，对女性的打击尤为严重。这导致了许多意想不到的后果，包括老年人在商店行窃的流行。安倍晋三让日本央行将货币基础翻倍的举动令对冲基金经理们兴奋不已，但却惩罚了那些必须依靠固定收入生活的储蓄者。如果 "涓滴经济 "能够真正发挥作用，这些变化就不会那么不稳定。如果日本的初创企业蓬勃发展，创造出大量新的就业机会来填补空缺，也会有所帮助。但日本的创业精神仍处于休眠状态。即使安倍晋三在里根经济学的基础上辅以社会主义，并公开资助风险投资行业，也需要数年时间才能见效。安倍的许多政策正是日本所需要的。加入美国主导的跨太平洋伙伴关系将为日本公司萎缩的血管注入新的活力。放松对能源、医疗服务、教育和农业等领域的管制也是如此。然而，本应在长期内取得成果的改革却缺乏短期内所需的金融缓冲和经济制衡。安倍必须制定一个过渡计划，以防止他的战略使日本这个引以为豪的平等主义社会两极分化。大多数美国人对里根经济学的遗产并不满意。



“All Abenomics is, really, is a race to nowhere,” says Sean Corrigan, chief investment strategist at Diapason Commodities Management SA in Lausanne, Switzerland.

"瑞士洛桑 Diapason Commodities Management SA 首席投资策略师肖恩-科里根（Sean Corrigan）说："安倍经济学实际上就是一场不归路竞赛。





Abe’s administration should be mulling radical remedies for the tsunami-ravaged Tohoku region. One idea is to use the games as an excuse to spread the “Bilbao Effect” to the rural northeast. The most influential Olympics have always been those that provide a catalyst at an ideal moment: Think about the 1988 Summer Games in Seoul, which fueled South Korea’s transition from autocracy to democracy, and Sydney 2000, which, pre–Group of Twenty, highlighted Australia’s place as a global power. The 2020 Games happen to coincide with Abe’s push to open up Japan, through both lowering trade barriers and getting the Japanese themselves to engage with the outside world after decades of looking inward.

安倍晋三的政府应该考虑为遭受海啸蹂躏的东北地区采取根本性的补救措施。其中一个想法是以奥运会为借口，将 "毕尔巴鄂效应 "推广到东北农村地区。最有影响力的奥运会总是那些在理想时刻提供催化剂的奥运会：1988年汉城夏季奥运会推动了韩国从专制向民主的转型，2000年悉尼奥运会则在20国集团成立之前就彰显了澳大利亚作为全球大国的地位。2020 年奥运会恰好与安倍晋三推动日本开放的政策不谋而合，安倍不仅降低了贸易壁垒，还让日本人在几十年的内向之后开始与外部世界接触。



Tokyo-based author Robert Whiting thinks the games will complement Abe’s efforts. “It will further help to globalize Japanese, in line with Abe’s goal or vision of making Japanese more international-minded and active,” Whiting said. “People will be focusing more on learning English to prepare for the Olympics, and parents will be more oriented toward having their children learn the language as well.”

东京作家罗伯特-惠廷（Robert Whiting）认为，运动会将对安倍晋三的努力起到补充作用。"Whiting说："这将进一步有助于日本的全球化，与安倍晋三的目标或愿景一致，即让日本人更具国际意识，更加活跃。"人们将更加注重学习英语，为奥运会做准备，家长们也会更加注重让孩子学习英语。



An Olympic boost could also give Abe the political cover he needs to deregulate an economy badly in need of some supply-side shock therapy. Big changes are always easier when optimism is on an upswing. A groundswell of public support would help Abe steamroll the vested interests standing in the way of freer trade, increased immigration, upgrades to corporate governance, and tax tweaks that promote entrepreneurship. It worked for Abe’s grandfather Kishi in 1964, when he used the proud inauguration of the bullet train to launch a major infrastructure spending drive. It might just work for Abe ahead of 2020.

奥运的推动也可以为安倍提供他所需要的政治掩护，以放松对亟需一些供给方休克疗法的经济的管制。在乐观情绪高涨的时候，大变革总是比较容易的。公众的支持浪潮将帮助安倍击退阻碍其进行更自由贸易、增加移民、提升公司治理水平以及调整税收以促进创业的既得利益者。1964 年，安倍晋三的祖父岸信介利用子弹头列车的隆重开幕启动了大规模的基础设施建设。在 2020 年之前，这对安倍晋三可能也会奏效。



Moving some of the sporting events to Tohoku would yield the infrastructure boom most of the region desperately needs and force an acceleration of the Fukushima cleanup. Japan’s bureaucratic and indecisive central government has proven ill-equipped for the task of rebuilding the towns and villages wiped out on March 11, 2011. The disaster left almost 19,000 dead or missing and forced cartographers to redraw maps of Japan’s northeast coastline. Tohoku could use a big boost. Careful planning would be needed to see that sports facilities will be used after the Olympics, and to ensure transparent efforts clear away the last traces of radiation near the damaged Fukushima nuclear reactors. Why not ask architecture rock star Frank Gehry to rural Japan?

将一些体育赛事转移到东北地区将带来该地区大部分地区急需的基础设施建设的繁荣，并迫使福岛清理工作加速进行。事实证明，日本官僚主义和优柔寡断的中央政府无力承担重建2011年3月11日被摧毁的城镇和村庄的任务。这场灾难造成近 19,000 人死亡或失踪，迫使制图师重新绘制日本东北海岸线地图。东北需要一个巨大的推动力。我们需要仔细规划，确保体育设施在奥运会后得到使用，并确保以透明的方式清除受损的福岛核反应堆附近最后的辐射痕迹。为什么不请建筑界的摇滚巨星弗兰克-盖里（Frank Gehry）到日本农村去呢？





What about a dose of Bangladesh? Abe also could run with an idea proposed by Muhammad Yunus. In August 2012, the Nobel Peace Prize winner choked back tears as he surveyed the wreckage: pulverized buildings, debris strewn for miles along urban waterfronts, giant ships sitting atop roads like discarded toys—macabre memorials to the thousands of dead and missing. Yunus is no stranger to nature’s wrath. In his native Bangladesh, earthquakes, floods, cyclones, and mudslides are a tragic way of life. But these scenes were of another magnitude. The devastation surrounding him wasn’t testing the mettle of a poor nation, but prosperous Japan.

来一剂孟加拉药怎么样？安倍晋三也可以采用穆罕默德-尤努斯提出的想法。2012 年 8 月，这位诺贝尔和平奖得主在目睹这场灾难的残骸时哽咽落泪：粉身碎骨的建筑、沿城市水岸散落数英里的瓦砾、巨轮像废弃的玩具一样停在公路上--这些都是对成千上万死者和失踪者的残酷纪念。尤努斯对大自然的愤怒并不陌生。在他的祖国孟加拉国，地震、洪水、飓风和泥石流是一种悲惨的生活方式。但这些场景却是另一种规模。他周围的灾难考验的不是一个贫穷国家的意志，而是繁荣的日本。



That visit to the devastated northeast Tohoku region was on the one-year anniversary of the nation’s worst earthquake and tsunami on record. Like many, Yunus came away haunted by an economic question: How can the Tohoku region not only rebuild, but reinvent itself and thrive in a time of austerity?

那次对东北灾区的访问正值该国有史以来最严重的地震和海啸一周年。和许多人一样，尤努斯也被一个经济问题所困扰：东北地区如何才能在紧缩时期不仅重建，而且重塑自我，实现繁荣？



Yunus came back with an unlikely suggestion, one that created its own tremors in Nagatacho, Tokyo’s Capitol Hill: Japan needs a microfinance industry. The Nobel prize was for Yunus’s role in promoting lending to the poor, a group typically ignored by bankers. Tiny amounts—$20, $50, or $100 so a family can buy a cow to start a dairy farm, or a mobile phone to open a communications business, or chickens to launch an egg company. In 1976, he founded Grameen Bank, which brought microfinance global.

尤努斯又提出了一个不太可能的建议，这个建议在东京国会山长田町引起了震动：日本需要一个小额信贷行业。诺贝尔奖是为了表彰尤努斯在促进向穷人贷款方面所发挥的作用，而穷人通常是被银行家忽视的群体。20美元、50美元或100美元的小额贷款可以让一个家庭买一头奶牛来开办奶牛场，或买一部手机来开办通信业务，或买鸡来开办鸡蛋公司。1976 年，他创办了格莱珉银行，将小额信贷推向全球。



What does any of this have to do with Japan? It is near the top of national per-capita income tables, has one of the highest savings rates, and Tokyo and Osaka are routinely in the running for world’s most expensive city. Japan gives impoverished Bangladesh billions of dollars in aid each year.

这些与日本有什么关系呢？日本在全国人均收入排行榜上名列前茅，是储蓄率最高的国家之一，东京和大阪经常被评为世界上最昂贵的城市。日本每年向贫困的孟加拉国提供数十亿美元的援助。



“It’s needed everywhere—it doesn’t matter where you are,” Yunus said in Tokyo on July 26, 2012. “When you come to a disaster area like Tohoku, it’s all the more important. You have to rebuild everything all over again. There’s no house, there’s nothing.”

"2012年7月26日，尤努斯在东京说："任何地方都需要--无论你身在何处。"当你来到像东北这样的灾区时，这就显得尤为重要。你必须重新重建一切。没有房子，什么都没有。



By “there’s nothing,” Yunus also means the general lack of economic life in a region that was dying even before the disaster. Take Rikuzentakata, which like many cities on Japan’s rugged northeast coast was suffering from economic decline and a shrinking population. When the tsunami hit, it killed 1,700 of its 24,000 inhabitants and destroyed most of its downtown buildings. There was the expectation, however farfetched, that the disaster would be the kind of event that would topple the status quo and complacency that has held Japan frozen in place for two decades.

尤努斯所说的 "什么都没有"，也是指这个地区普遍缺乏经济活力，甚至在灾难发生前就已奄奄一息。就拿陆前高田来说，它和日本崎岖的东北海岸的许多城市一样，正遭受着经济衰退和人口减少之苦。海啸来袭时，24000 名居民中有 1700 人丧生，市中心的大部分建筑被毁。人们期望，无论多么牵强附会，这场灾难都会成为打破现状和自满情绪的事件，而这种现状和自满情绪已让日本僵持了二十年之久。



That hope has since been dashed by paralysis in Tokyo and a return to the petty infighting that passes for political leadership. That is prompting local officials to take matters into their own hands. Rikuzentakata is working to create a small, self-sufficient city that creates new jobs in renewable energy to replace those lost to the decline of agriculture and fisheries. That is a long-term project, though. It is being hindered by the central government’s failure to channel more money into Tohoku communities, and by its reluctance to delegate spending decisions to regional leaders. It is here where microfinance might pay sizable dividends. Locals can pool their savings and lend them out to would-be entrepreneurs—$10,000 here, $100,000 there.

此后，东京的瘫痪和政治领导层的小内讧又使这一希望破灭。这促使地方官员开始自行采取行动。陆前高田正在努力创建一个自给自足的小城市，在可再生能源领域创造新的就业机会，以取代因农业和渔业衰退而失去的就业机会。不过，这是一个长期项目。中央政府未能将更多资金投入东北地区的社区，也不愿将支出决策权下放给地区领导人，这些都阻碍了该项目。正是在这里，小额信贷可能会带来可观的红利。当地人可以将他们的储蓄集中起来，借给未来的企业家--这里 1 万美元，那里 10 万美元。



It could be a boon for households that lost everything, with an added benefit: Microfinance tends to extend more credit to women than other lenders. Many Tohoku residents lost their collateral and might be considered poor credit risks, and women have limited access to credit. Tohoku is a relatively poor region in Japan and enjoys strong social cohesion, something that would be useful in monitoring how loans are used and repaid.

对于失去一切的家庭来说，这可能是一个福音，而且还有一个额外的好处：与其他贷款人相比，小额信贷往往向妇女提供更多的信贷。东北地区的许多居民失去了抵押品，可能会被视为信贷风险较低，而妇女获得信贷的机会有限。东北地区是日本相对贫困的地区，社会凝聚力很强，这有助于监督贷款的使用和偿还情况。



Microfinance-like currents are already stirring in Japan. Tokyo-based Music Securities Inc. has set up small-lot lending programs that helped sake brewers, coffee shops, musicians, fish retailers, and soy-sauce makers gain access to financing. Yet we need to think bigger in an economy faced with a surplus of liquidity and a dearth of credit. Microfinance on a grander scale might enable the northeast’s community leaders to steer around the paralysis in Tokyo, where bureaucrats are impervious to their demands and clueless about their needs. It would help local credit systems gain traction in ways the BOJ’s zero-rate policies can’t. Japanese need alternatives to banks, which aren’t lending or offering creative financial products. Micro-lending could help businesses and households steer around the credit logjam.

类似小额信贷的潮流已经在日本涌动。总部位于东京的音乐证券公司（Music Securities Inc.然而，在一个流动性过剩而信贷匮乏的经济体中，我们需要考虑更多。在东京，官僚们对他们的要求视而不见，对他们的需求也一无所知。日本央行的零利率政策也无法帮助地方信贷系统获得牵引力。日本人需要银行以外的选择，因为银行既不提供贷款，也不提供有创意的金融产品。小额贷款可以帮助企业和家庭摆脱信贷困境。



Japan’s government could provide some startup cash to supplement local savings. Given the huge sums of money it doles out for infrastructure projects in Hokkaido and Kyushu in the far north and south of the country, respectively, the cost of setting up a kind of Grameen Japan would be minuscule and the risks limited. Is that likely to happen? The odds aren’t great given how averse Tokyo’s bureaucrats are to anything that smacks of originality or setting a precedent. Yet Yunus showed it was possible for poor people in Bangladesh to get the credit they deserve. There’s no good reason to think the same can’t happen in Japan.

日本政府可以提供一些启动资金，补充当地的储蓄。鉴于日本政府分别为该国最北部的北海道和最南部的九州的基础设施项目提供了巨额资金，建立一种日本格莱珉银行的成本将是微不足道的，风险也是有限的。这种情况可能发生吗？可能性不大，因为东京的官僚们对任何有创意或开创先例的事情都很反感。然而，尤努斯证明了孟加拉国的穷人有可能获得他们应得的信贷。我们没有理由认为同样的事情不会在日本发生。





The Tohoku region also could use a dose of China. If you want to silence a room filled with Japanese politicians, suggest they should learn from the Communist Party. The conventional wisdom favors the flipside of this dynamic: China should be studying Japan’s playbook. Japan, after all, is an example of both what China needs to do (create a vibrant domestic economy and high living standards) and what it mustn’t (slide into bad-loan crises and deflation). Yet here’s one word for Japanese policy makers who dismiss the idea they should heed China’s example: Shenzhen. For two decades now, economists have been urging Tokyo to create a special-enterprise zone or two. The idea is to have a laboratory where officials could try drastic alternatives to Japan’s rigid, bureaucratic, and change-resistant model—a controlled environment in which the nationwide laws and norms that thwart economic energy could be repealed. Abe has talked about such an experiment, but as currently envisioned it would more like Shenzhen-lite. Southern China features such a place. In 1980, Deng Xiaoping started China’s first special-economic zone in a coastal village that was nothing to look at. Today, Shenzhen is a teeming collage of huge skyscrapers, thriving industrial parks, 10 million people, one of the world’s busiest ports, and some of the biggest manufacturing and outsourcing industries anywhere. It’s the center of Chinese experimentation. There, officials can test what works and what doesn’t: which corporate tax rates offer the best balance of attracting foreign investment while filling government coffers in Beijing, which labor standards make the most sense, which corporate-governance standards are most advantageous, which immigration procedures are optimal, which regulations stay or go. Chinese authorities are now experimenting anew with a Shanghai free-trade zone. China’s experience inspired nations as disparate as Angola, Bangladesh, Brazil, Iran, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Poland, Russia, and even North Korea to erect special economic regions, and India, too.

东北地区也可以借鉴中国的经验。如果你想让满屋子的日本政客闭嘴，建议他们向中国共产党学习。传统智慧倾向于这一动态的反面：中国应该学习日本的做法。毕竟，日本既是中国需要做什么（创造充满活力的国内经济和高生活水平）的榜样，也是中国不能做什么（陷入不良贷款危机和通货紧缩）的榜样。然而，日本的政策制定者们却不以为然，认为他们应该以中国为榜样：深圳。二十年来，经济学家一直在敦促东京建立一两个企业特区。他们的想法是建立一个实验室，让官员们可以在这里尝试以激烈的方式替代日本僵化、官僚和抗拒变革的模式--在一个受控的环境中，可以废除阻碍经济活力的全国性法律和规范。安倍晋三曾谈到过这样一个实验，但按照目前的设想，它更像是一个 "轻深圳"。中国南方就有这样一个地方。1980 年，邓小平在一个毫不起眼的沿海村庄创办了中国第一个经济特区。如今的深圳，摩天大楼鳞次栉比，工业园区欣欣向荣，人口达 1000 万，是世界上最繁忙的港口之一，拥有世界上最大的制造业和外包产业。这里是中国的实验中心。在这里，官员们可以测试哪些措施可行，哪些措施不可行：哪种企业税率既能吸引外资，又能使北京政府的国库充盈，哪种劳动标准最合理，哪种企业管理标准最有利，哪种移民程序最合适，哪种规章制度有去有留。中国政府目前正在对上海自由贸易区进行新的尝试。中国的经验激励了安哥拉、孟加拉国、巴西、伊朗、哈萨克斯坦、菲律宾、波兰、俄罗斯甚至朝鲜等国建立经济特区，印度也是如此。



You can argue that India’s software industry is such an entity—one immune enough from New Delhi’s dysfunction to create the growth and jobs India so badly needs. Why not Japan? Koizumi broached the issue in the early 2000s, but his vision was never effectively implemented. Of all the growth-revitalizing strategies employed by Tokyo, the most favored ones are debt and concrete—debt to finance white-elephant public-works projects, and concrete to build them. Japan is too much about saving unproductive jobs, not creating innovative new ones. What Japan never tried is a dose of well-calibrated supply-side economics. Japan shouldn’t embrace of the ideologies of Ayn Rand and Ronald Reagan. But it has gotten as far it can with financial socialism. Even after more than two decades of start-and-stop growth, Japan’s focus is on preserving its way of life, not adjusting to the demands of globalization and Chinese competition. The big debates in Tokyo are over raising taxes and joining free-trade deals. Some fresh thinking is in order, and Japan’s March 11 earthquake and tsunami provided a perfect opportunity. There are many cities the government could declare as economic-policy labs: Fukuoka, Kobe, Nagasaki, Sapporo, and Yokohama. The devastated northeastern Tohoku region is a better choice. Tohoku can be to Japan what Shenzhen was to China: Allow large-scale deregulation, cut red tape that frustrates businesses, offer 10-year tax holidays for new investments and incentives for employers generating full-time jobs, apply a corporate tax rate in the neighborhood of 11 percent, suspend gasoline taxes, subsidize electricity, eliminate sales taxes, and structure a variety of enticements to attract capital into renewable-energy research and production.

你可以说，印度的软件产业就是这样一个实体--足以免受新德里功能失调的影响，创造印度急需的增长和就业机会。为什么日本不能呢？小泉在 2000 年代初提出了这个问题，但他的愿景从未得到有效实施。在东京采用的所有振兴增长的战略中，最受欢迎的是债务和混凝土--用债务来资助大而无当的公共工程项目，用混凝土来建造这些项目。日本过于注重挽救非生产性岗位，而不是创造创新性的新岗位。日本从未尝试过的是一剂经过良好校准的供给侧经济学。日本不应该接受艾因-兰德和罗纳德-里根的意识形态。但它已经在金融社会主义上走到了尽头。即使在经历了二十多年时断时续的增长之后，日本的重点仍然是保持自己的生活方式，而不是适应全球化和中国竞争的要求。东京的大辩论是关于提高税收和加入自由贸易协议。现在需要一些新思维，而日本 3 月 11 日的地震和海啸提供了一个绝佳的机会。政府可以宣布许多城市为经济政策实验室：福冈、神户、长崎、札幌和横滨。遭受重创的东北地区是一个更好的选择。东北对日本的意义就像深圳对中国的意义一样：允许大规模放松管制，减少阻碍企业发展的繁文缛节，为新投资提供 10 年免税期，为创造全职工作岗位的雇主提供奖励，实行 11% 左右的企业税率，暂停征收汽油税，提供电力补贴，取消销售税，并制定各种激励措施，吸引资金投入可再生能源的研究和生产。



Martin Schulz, of the Fujitsu Research Institute, would take things a step further and simply make Tohoku corporate-tax free. That, he argues, would get young people and families into a region that was dying demographically even before the earth shook and the waters rose. China has much to learn from Japan. From the ashes of World War II, it created a safe, prosperous, universally literate, environmentally stable, and reasonably egalitarian nation. Yet Japan has long since lost the vibrancy and policy innovation that propelled it to today’s heights. Abe should create a Japanese Shenzhen. It would be a much-needed recognition that if Japan can’t beat China, it can at least learn a thing or two from Asia’s economic upstart.

富士通研究所的马丁-舒尔茨（Martin Schulz）则更进一步，干脆让东北免征企业税。他认为，这样做可以让年轻人和家庭进入这个地区，而这个地区在地震和洪水来临之前人口就已经濒临死亡。中国有很多地方值得日本学习。在二战的废墟上，日本创造了一个安全、繁荣、全民识字、环境稳定、合理平等的国家。然而，日本早已失去了将其推向今天高度的活力和政策创新。安倍应该创建一个日本的深圳。如果日本不能打败中国，至少可以向亚洲经济的后起之秀学习一二，这将是一种亟需的认可。



The western city of Fukuoka also is a worthy candidate for free-trade zone status. This city of 1.5 million aims to become Japan’s Silicon Valley. As technology-crazed as Japanese are, the government has never encouraged universities, companies, and investors to join hands to help the economy. The result is less innovation in a nation that should be awash in it. People such as Masaharu Okada of Kyushu University are working to change that. If they succeed, Japan’s economic future will brighten. If they don’t, expect the decades-long slide in living standards—and markets—to accelerate. Okada is the first to admit he’s an odd character on campus. A lawyer by training, he spent many years working for technology firms in Boston, New York, Seattle, and Tokyo, including Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp. and Access Co. Now he’s back in his hometown to light a fire under his students. “Japan has always been about big companies and lifetime employment,” Okada says. “What’s missing are startup companies like the ones in the United States that come out of nowhere, create many good-paying jobs, and change the world. We need to support this kind of thinking, and that is why I returned to Fukuoka and decided to work with students.”

西部城市福冈也是自由贸易区的理想候选城市。这座拥有 150 万人口的城市的目标是成为日本的硅谷。尽管日本人对技术十分狂热，但政府却从未鼓励大学、公司和投资者携手帮助经济发展。结果是，在一个本应充满创新的国家，创新却越来越少。九州大学的 Masaharu Okada 等人正在努力改变这种状况。如果他们成功了，日本的经济前景将一片光明。否则，几十年来生活水平和市场下滑的趋势将加速。冈田是第一个承认自己在校园里是个怪人的人。律师出身的他曾在波士顿、纽约、西雅图和东京的技术公司工作多年，其中包括日本电报电话公司（Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp.现在，他回到家乡，为他的学生们点燃一把火。"冈田说："日本一直以来都是大公司和终身就业的天下。"我们缺少的是像美国那样的初创公司，它们横空出世，创造了许多高薪工作，改变了世界。我们需要支持这种想法，这就是我回到福冈并决定与学生一起工作的原因。



Okada works closely with the University–Industry International Collaboration Center, and his specialty is intellectual-property strategies. It’s all about encouraging students with an idea and a dream to execute it and locate the financing needed to create profitable companies from scratch. Why Fukuoka? Japan has long been too Tokyo-centric. Many executives aim to succeed in the nation’s business and political center before looking overseas. Fukuoka has a number of things going for it. One is its proximity to China and South Korea. Another is an international mind-set that can seem more prevalent than in Tokyo or Osaka. And, well, it’s a terrific place. In 2012, Monocle magazine named Fukuoka the twelfth-most-livable city in the world. The criteria included urban planning, transportation links, crime rates, educational facilities, and environmental initiatives. The quality of life Fukuokans enjoy is the envy of many Japanese. It’s also about fiscal reality. The global crisis means areas far outside Tokyo, like Kyushu, increasingly need to generate their own economic output. There’s simply less public spending to go around. The tax system favors giants over startups, which exacerbates the concentration of new ideas in a handful of corporate boardrooms. It’s time to change that, and Fukuoka is worth a look at ground central for Japan’s startup boom. A growing hunger for green technologies around the globe is fueling Fukuoka’s optimism. Around the city, small companies are producing more efficient hydrogen and solar energy, meeting global demand for recycling technologies, and making diesel fuel out of discarded edible oils. The city’s entrepreneurial spirit prompted former Sony CEO Idei to hold his annual Asia Innovation Initiative in Fukuoka. In the end, it doesn’t matter where Japan sets up its Silicon Valley, just so long as it does. As China, India, and Southeast Asia raise the competitive pressure, Japan’s ability to maintain a profitable export business for its large manufacturers is getting squeezed. The challenge is to create postindustrial export industries that are more about ideas and services.

冈田与产学国际合作中心密切合作，他的专长是知识产权战略。他的工作就是鼓励有想法、有梦想的学生去实现它，并为从零开始创建盈利公司找到所需的资金。为什么选择福冈？长期以来，日本过于以东京为中心。许多管理人员都希望在日本的商业和政治中心取得成功，然后再将目光投向海外。福冈有很多优势。其一，福冈毗邻中国和韩国。另一个原因是福冈的国际化思维似乎比东京或大阪更为普遍。此外，这里还是一个了不起的地方。2012 年，《Monocle》杂志将福冈评为全球最宜居城市第十二名。评选标准包括城市规划、交通连接、犯罪率、教育设施和环保措施。福冈人的生活质量令许多日本人羡慕不已。这也与现实的财政状况有关。全球危机意味着九州等远离东京的地区越来越需要创造自己的经济产出。可支配的公共开支越来越少。税收制度有利于巨头而非初创企业，这加剧了新创意集中在少数几家公司会议室的现象。现在是改变这种状况的时候了，福冈是日本初创企业蓬勃发展的中心，值得一看。全球各地对绿色技术的渴求与日俱增，助长了福冈的乐观情绪。在福冈，小公司正在生产更高效的氢能和太阳能，满足全球对回收技术的需求，并利用废弃食用油制造柴油。这座城市的创业精神促使索尼公司前首席执行官伊迪在福冈举办了一年一度的 "亚洲创新倡议"。归根结底，日本在哪里建立自己的硅谷并不重要，重要的是它能做到。随着中国、印度和东南亚竞争压力的增加，日本大型制造商维持出口业务盈利的能力正受到挤压。日本面临的挑战是如何创建更注重创意和服务的后工业出口产业。



America’s Silicon Valley didn’t come about overnight. It was the result of a venture-capital system; robust private and public universities; brainpower from abroad; flexible labor markets; large research and development budgets, including those of the U.S. government; and loads of contrarian thinking. The importance of strong antitrust laws and openness to foreign investment also can’t be understated. Considering all these ingredients, Japan faces an uphill climb. Getting over a deeply rooted resistance to immigration will be difficult enough, never mind cultivating a risk-taking dynamic in an aging workforce more accustomed to working at big companies than hanging out a shingle. All this would make Japan more about job creation from the ground up than job protection from the top down.

美国的硅谷并非一蹴而就。它是风险投资体系、强大的私立和公立大学、海外人才、灵活的劳动力市场、庞大的研发预算（包括美国政府的预算）以及大量逆向思维的结果。此外，强有力的反垄断法和对外国投资的开放态度也不容低估。考虑到所有这些因素，日本面临着艰巨的挑战。克服对移民根深蒂固的抵触情绪就已经很困难了，更不用说在老龄化的劳动力中培养一种敢于冒险的活力。所有这些都将使日本更注重从基层创造就业机会，而不是从上到下保护就业机会。



Two numbers colored Shinzo Abe’s 2013 and offered hints about Japan’s prospects this year: 57 and 49. The first, of course, is how much in percentage terms the Nikkei 225 stock average surged in 2013. The prime minister even dropped by the Tokyo Stock Exchange on December 30, 2013, to celebrate with floor traders, declaring, “Next year will go well. With this thought, I want to do my best. Next year too, Abenomics is a buy.” The second number—49—makes that unlikely. It corresponds to Abe’s public approval rate as of December 24, 2013. History shows that Japanese leaders with sub-50 percent support rates get little done and don’t tend to last very long. And Abe’s could actually be far worse. That Mainichi poll was done two days before he angered the world with his provocative visit to the Yasukuni Shrine, an action most didn’t support.

两个数字为安倍晋三的 2013 年增添了色彩，也为日本今年的前景埋下了伏笔：57和49。第一个数字当然是按百分比计算的日经 225 指数在 2013 年飙升的幅度。2013 年 12 月 30 日，首相甚至来到东京证券交易所，与场内交易员一起庆祝，并宣称："明年会很顺利。带着这样的想法，我想尽我所能。明年也是，安倍经济学是买点"。第二个数字-49-让人觉得不太可能。这相当于安倍截至 2013 年 12 月 24 日的民意支持率。历史表明，支持率低于 50% 的日本领导人几乎一事无成，而且任期也不会太长。而安倍的支持率实际上可能更糟。这次《每日新闻》民调是在安倍参拜靖国神社激怒世界的前两天进行的，大多数人都不支持安倍参拜靖国神社。



That’s ominous news for Abe’s so-called third arrow. The first two arrows—monetary and fiscal pump priming—hit the target well enough, as evidenced by the largest surge in the Nikkei since 1972. But the rally is predicated on the third phase of Abenomics, the structural reform part that failed to materialize at all in 2013.

这对安倍所谓的第三支箭来说是个不祥的消息。前两支箭--货币政策和财政政策--很好地击中了目标，日经指数自1972年以来的最大涨幅就是证明。但这一涨势的前提是安倍经济学的第三阶段，即结构性改革部分，而这部分在 2013 年根本没有实现。



The hope remains that in 2014, Abe will boldly trample over the vested interests standing in the way of lower trade barriers, less regulation, and a greater embrace of free-market principles. In the Chinese zodiac, the 12 months of the horse are an opportunity for revitalization and improvement. Clearly, foreign investors had this ethos in mind, at least indirectly, when they drove up shares. The year 2014 is Abe’s to gallop toward epochal change. Here are four reasons they are likely to be disappointed.

人们仍然希望，2014 年，安倍晋三将大胆地践踏阻碍降低贸易壁垒、减少监管、更多地奉行自由市场原则的既得利益。在中国生肖中，马年的 12 个月是振兴和改善的契机。显然，外国投资者在推高股价时，至少间接地考虑到了这一精神。2014 年，安倍晋三将驰骋于划时代的变革之中。以下是他们可能会失望的四个原因。



One, Abe’s window is closing. The time to force through controversial changes was in the second half of 2013, when the Bank of Japan’s monetary bonanza was exciting business leaders and driving Abe’s approval ratings toward the 80s. Back then, Abe could practically do no wrong. He could have taken the floor of parliament and said something like, “Japan is back, and the investors of the world are responding with great enthusiasm. To sustain this high, we must act quickly and decisively. And so, each month I will unveil a deregulatory step that lawmakers of the past lacked the courage to take to make Japan more vibrant. First, corporate tax reform. Next month, legislation to empower women in the workforce. The month after that, moves to loosen the labor market. After that, cutting trade tariffs, encouraging startups, attracting more foreign workers, and initiating a new energy policy to make Japan a global power in renewables. And by the start of 2014, my third arrow will be flying toward our ultimate goal: less deflation and greater dynamism.”

其一，安倍的窗口正在关闭。在 2013 年下半年，日本央行的货币宽松政策让商界领袖们兴奋不已，也让安倍晋三的支持率飙升至 80 多点。那时，安倍几乎不会犯错。他本可以在国会发言时说这样的话："日本回来了，全世界的投资者正以极大的热情作出反应。为了保持这种高涨，我们必须迅速果断地采取行动。因此，我每个月都会公布一个放松管制的措施，过去的立法者缺乏勇气采取这些措施来使日本更加充满活力。首先是企业税改革。下个月，立法赋予女性劳动力权力。下个月，放宽劳动力市场。之后，削减贸易关税，鼓励初创企业，吸引更多外籍员工，并启动新能源政策，使日本成为全球可再生能源大国。到 2014 年初，我的第三支箭将飞向我们的最终目标：减少通货紧缩，增强活力。



Two, looking for growth in the wrong places. Instead, of the above, Abe spent political capital restarting nuclear power plants against public opinion, traveling the world to sell reactors for Hitachi Ltd. and other companies, pushing through a sales-tax increase that will dent consumption, passing a controversial secrets bill that undermine press freedom, and irking two of Japan’s biggest customers with his December 26, 2013, shrine visit. The only way Abenomics works is if companies benefiting from a weaker yen return the favor and boost wages.

第二，在错误的地方寻求增长。安倍没有采取上述措施，而是将政治资本用于违背民意重启核电站、到世界各地为日立公司和其他公司推销反应堆、推动提高销售税以抑制消费、通过有争议的保密法案以破坏新闻自由，以及在2013年12月26日参拜神社以刺激日本最大的两个客户。安倍经济学发挥作用的唯一途径是，受益于日元走软的企业必须投桃报李，提高工资。



Three, the nationalist fix seems to be in. The longer I cover Abe, the more I think of historian Thomas Frank. His 2004 book, What’s the Matter with Kansas?, was about America and how conservatives there essentially win the hearts of the middle class with a bait-and-switch strategy. They get households to vote against their economic interests by distracting them with social issues like abortion and gay marriage, giving them a free hand to enrich the 1 percent without a backlash. Abe does that in reverse: distracting Japan with talk of growth and prosperity so that he can carry out his rightward agency. His visit to Yasukuni, which honors 14 class A war criminals from World War II, suggests that he is more interested in catering to nationalists than Chinese and South Korean consumers. And Abe’s push to revise school textbooks to whitewash Japan’s military aggression during World War II means his eye is now on the real prize: imposing the deeply revisionist take of history he inherited from his grandfather. Former Prime Minister Nobusuke Kishi was himself jailed for war crimes before eventually returning to politics. As Abe carries out this bit of family business, his true mandate from voters, economic reforms, will get short shrift.

第三，民族主义似乎已经定型。报道安倍晋三的时间越长，我就越多地想起历史学家托马斯-弗兰克。他在2004年出版的《堪萨斯州怎么了》（What's the Matter with Kansas?他们用堕胎和同性恋婚姻等社会问题分散家庭的注意力，让他们投出有损其经济利益的一票，从而放手让1%的人致富而不会引起反弹。安倍则反其道而行之：通过谈论增长和繁荣来分散日本人的注意力，从而使他可以实施右倾代理。安倍参拜靖国神社，纪念 14 名二战甲级战犯，表明他更想迎合民族主义者，而不是中国和韩国消费者。安倍晋三推动修改教科书以粉饰日本在二战期间的军事侵略行为，这意味着他的目光正投向真正的目标：将他从祖父那里继承的严重修正主义历史观强加于人。前首相岸信介本人曾因战争罪入狱，最终重返政坛。在安倍执行这一家族事业的过程中，他从选民那里获得的真正授权--经济改革--将受到冷落。



Four, the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) may unravel. When optimists toast Abe for making bold decisions, his move to join the U.S. trade deal is exhibit A. But Japan’s entry could also be the undoing of the 12-nation pact. The reason: the number of exceptions Tokyo is demanding for entry, including agriculture and automobiles. A watered-down version of TPP was never the idea—this deal is supposed to touch every sector of every economy. So, expect other signatory nations to expect the Japan treatment: Malaysia can say its affirmative-action policies are off the table; Vietnam can protect its state-owned enterprises; New Zealand can designate its dairy industry as no-go zone, and so on. Abe supporters see TPP as an economic Trojan horse that once inside Japan Inc.’s walls will beat back vested interests. Thanks to Abe’s timidity, not so much.

第四，跨太平洋伙伴关系协定（TPP）可能瓦解。当乐观主义者为安倍晋三做出的大胆决定干杯时，他加入美国贸易协定的举动就是一个例证。原因是东京要求加入的例外情况太多，包括农业和汽车。TPP 的缩水版从来都不是我们的想法--这项协议应该触及每个经济体的每个部门。因此，希望其他签署国也能享受日本的待遇：马来西亚可以说它的平权法案政策不在考虑之列；越南可以保护它的国有企业；新西兰可以把它的乳制品行业列为禁区，等等。安倍的支持者将 TPP 视为经济特洛伊木马，一旦进入日本公司的围墙，就会击退既得利益者。但由于安倍晋三的胆怯，TPP 并非如此。



Japan has no time to waste. Prime Minister Abe must break with the half measures of the past and focus all his energy on creating a whole new generation of innovators. That wouldn’t just pay huge dividends for faster economic growth, higher living standards, and getting Japan off Galapagos. It would morph Japan into a global role model once again, with all the soft power and self-confidence that accompany that status. For centuries, Japan has shown it can do just that. It’s time for Abe to prove that “Japan is back” isn’t just a slogan but a blueprint for renewal from which the world can learn.

日本没有时间可以浪费。安倍首相必须摒弃过去的半途而废，集中全部精力培养新一代创新人才。这不仅能带来巨大红利，加快经济增长，提高生活水平，让日本脱离加拉帕戈斯群岛。它将使日本再次成为全球榜样，并拥有与之相称的软实力和自信。几个世纪以来，日本已经证明了自己能够做到这一点。现在是安倍证明 "日本回来了 "不仅仅是一句口号，而是世界可以借鉴的复兴蓝图的时候了。





